[Amit Varma]: Sometimes we look at the way things are and we think that's the only way they
[Amit Varma]: can be. Maybe we look at the lines on a map and they seem to tell us something
[Amit Varma]: real about the world until we realize that we're looking at a map from 200
[Amit Varma]: years ago and there are different lines now. Sometimes we look at a person who is
[Amit Varma]: 25 years old and we make judgments about that person and assume that what they
[Amit Varma]: are is all they will ever be and then we look at them 25 years later and they are
[Amit Varma]: someone else. These fixed ways of looking at the world happens a lot in
[Amit Varma]: industries, in organizations and it happened in the world of Indian media.
[Amit Varma]: Once upon a time everyone who ran our big media houses knew each other, moved
[Amit Varma]: in the same circles, looked the same, looked at the world the same way. Their
[Amit Varma]: gaze was limited but everyone was so used to that way of looking that there
[Amit Varma]: seemed to be no other way to see the world. It may have stayed that way
[Amit Varma]: forever or changed at a glacial pace but then the internet came around and
[Amit Varma]: technology empowered people everywhere and today we realize how limited that
[Amit Varma]: gaze was. Big media based out of Delhi looked at the world the way a privileged
[Amit Varma]: North Indian man would and that point of view misses everything important about
[Amit Varma]: this country. But thankfully as India is changing so is our media.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and
[Unknown]: behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. My guest today is Dhania Rajendran, founder
[Amit Varma]: and editor of the News Minute. Dhania grew up in Palakkad in Kerala, not a
[Amit Varma]: place that has produced too many media superstars. She got into journalism a
[Amit Varma]: couple of decades ago and spent a few years in Times Now where she rose to be
[Amit Varma]: Bureau Chief for all of South India. Working in what she now describes as a
[Amit Varma]: toxic newsroom, she grew frustrated by the homogeneous gaze of her editors in
[Amit Varma]: Delhi. It was a gaze centered around North India. Stories from the South were
[Amit Varma]: not given importance. She would not only have to produce great stories, she would
[Amit Varma]: also have to market them to her bosses to convince them that these were worth
[Amit Varma]: carrying. Another gaze that was a problem was the male gaze. Even in an
[Amit Varma]: industry that had many women reporters, every story was looked at from a male
[Amit Varma]: point of view. When Dhania eventually struck out on her own, she decided to
[Amit Varma]: fight these gazes, to build diverse newsrooms with people of different
[Amit Varma]: genders, castes, and class backgrounds. She walked the talk in building the
[Amit Varma]: News Minute, which in my opinion does some of the finest journalism in this
[Amit Varma]: country. They break stories no one else goes near, and they look at stories
[Amit Varma]: through a variety of different lenses. Dhania was kind enough to open up to me
[Amit Varma]: about her journey so far and her thoughts on Indian media. But before we
[Amit Varma]: get to the conversation, I want to make an appeal. If you agree with me that this
[Amit Varma]: kind of brave journalism is what India needs, then support it not just with
[Amit Varma]: words, but with actions. Head on over to the newsminute.com slash support us, the
[Amit Varma]: link will be in the show notes, and help them out with whatever monetary
[Amit Varma]: contribution you can afford. All of us who crave good journalism, let us not
[Amit Varma]: take it for granted. It exists despite the odds, and it needs us to keep
[Amit Varma]: existing. So let's do our bit. And I'm sure you'll agree with me about what a
[Amit Varma]: great cause the News Minute is, after you hear my conversation with Dhania. But
[Amit Varma]: first, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building
[Amit Varma]: a reading habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long-form
[Amit Varma]: articles and essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet,
[Amit Varma]: but the problem we all face is, how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know
[Amit Varma]: what to read? How do we put the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered
[Amit Varma]: one way. A couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ
[Amit Varma]: Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up-level themselves by
[Amit Varma]: reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the
[Amit Varma]: Daily Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long-form article to read.
[Amit Varma]: The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models
[Amit Varma]: and marmalade. This helped me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I
[Amit Varma]: understood the world a little better than I did before. So if you want to
[Amit Varma]: build your reading habit, head on over to CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. New batches start every month. They also have a great program called
[Amit Varma]: Future Stack, which helps you stay up-to-date with ideas, skills and mental
[Amit Varma]: models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future Stack batches start
[Amit Varma]: every Saturday. Also, check out their Social Capital Compound, which helps you
[Amit Varma]: master social media. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees.
[Amit Varma]: 2,500 if you use the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to CTQ Compounds
[Amit Varma]: at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN. Up-level yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Dhaniya, welcome to The Scene and The Unseen. Thank you, Amit. It's a pleasure
[Amit Varma]: being here. Yeah, I got to tell all my listeners that I'm recording in this
[Amit Varma]: Bangalore studio, which is on the second floor and Dhaniya has a broken foot and
[Amit Varma]: was kind enough to actually come here with the broken foot. So I'm very
[Amit Varma]: grateful for that, though it would seem from the body of your work that
[Amit Varma]: you're deeply committed to everything you take up. So at one level, also not
[Amit Varma]: surprised. So how did your foot break? So this is the first fracture I've got in
[Guest]: my life. I am a cat person, I mean I'm a pet person. I have two cats at
[Guest]: home and there are stray cats which come sleep and go off. So one stray cat fought
[Guest]: with my house cat and I ran behind them and I hit something. I don't know what, I
[Guest]: can't remember properly, but my toe fractured. And so I've been like this for
[Guest]: three weeks. The first time actually I'm stepping out, other than to see the
[Amit Varma]: doctor. Wow, okay. So let's kind of start at the beginning and tell me
[Amit Varma]: where you grew up, where were you born, where did you grow up, what were your
[Guest]: young years like? So I'm from Palakkad in Kerala. I mean at those times it was
[Guest]: called Palghat and then it was changed to Palakkad. I did my schooling in
[Guest]: college in Palakkad itself. I studied in a convent school called Karnike
[Guest]: Mada Convent and I studied in a government school called Government Victoria. I have
[Guest]: had a very active life in Palakkad in the sense that, I know a lot of people
[Guest]: say that they were rebellious in their childhood. I'm not saying it just for
[Guest]: being fashionable, I actually was. And in the convent that I studied, from the
[Guest]: nuns to the teachers to everybody, they were really, I think they molded me to a
[Guest]: large extent. Of course other than my parents and my friends, but my teachers
[Guest]: and my nuns and the ones who ran the school and then college came. So I don't
[Guest]: know if you know much about how the education system is in Kerala, but in a
[Guest]: convent it is much more disciplined, you know, you have classes properly. The
[Guest]: reason I am saying is, if it's a government school there could be a
[Guest]: hartal, there could be a strike which the students call and then there won't be
[Guest]: class that day. So nothing like that happens in a convent. We go every day to
[Guest]: school, we go in the school bus, come back. But it was really amazing because
[Guest]: in Kerala you have this very vibrant system of extracurricular activities. For
[Guest]: example, from your childhood you will have a school level competition, then
[Guest]: sub-district, then district and state. So it's like an entire year is charted for
[Guest]: you just for your extracurricular activities. So in that I was into
[Guest]: elocution, theater, all kinds of things. Like I was into Sanskrit speech because
[Guest]: it's easy to get points for that. Nobody can speak five minutes in Sanskrit
[Guest]: continuously. I could manage to speak gibberish in Sanskrit for five minutes.
[Guest]: So I used to win that and Sanskrit drama, lots of things. It was fun and I think by
[Guest]: the end of school, which is 8th, 9th and 10th, I was into science. I keep changing my
[Guest]: interest. So I was a young scientist of India. There's a competition which
[Guest]: happens where Professor Yashpal Sharma used to be one of the mentors. So I was
[Guest]: one of those young scientists of India and in Palakkad, a small town, like if a
[Guest]: kid does something, immediately you're under Manorama or Mathrubhumi the next day.
[Guest]: And my father is sort of pushy also. So every time people used to meet me and
[Guest]: say, oh you will become a scientist. So I was like, absolutely no. If you expect me
[Guest]: to do something, I will not do that. I did not tell my dad I went to this
[Guest]: Government Victoria College. My father wanted me to join another girls college
[Guest]: which was more disciplined, nice. Not because it's a girls college, but because it's
[Guest]: more disciplined. But he was not against me going to the Government College. I
[Guest]: went there and I took the form and I filled Commerce. So everybody thought I'll
[Guest]: become a scientist. I definitely did not have the brains to become a scientist. I
[Guest]: mean, you know in school when you go for a competition and you win it, you can't
[Guest]: equate that to actually becoming a scientist. So I know my capability and I
[Guest]: know people are expecting too much out of me. So I'm like, screw it, I'm not gonna
[Guest]: become a scientist or I'm not even going to try. So I went into Commerce, it was
[Guest]: the easiest. And five years in college was very different from the school
[Guest]: because here is a college which is highly political. Like every second day
[Guest]: there'll be a strike, they will shut down class. So the first one year I observed
[Guest]: everything and then I got into student politics and the next four years were
[Guest]: really like, it changed my life a lot also. Like how I perceive things, how
[Guest]: a leader should be or you know the kind of resistance that you face. For example,
[Guest]: when you study in a convent school and there are like 10 smart kids, you give
[Guest]: everything off to them easily, right. There's a competition, you immediately say
[Guest]: okay you go for dance, you go for elocution. There is not really any
[Guest]: democracy there. But when you come to a college and there are kids from all
[Guest]: sections of society and especially the SFI was very powerful, there's a lot of
[Guest]: resistance. They don't want your English-speaking convent kids to just come
[Guest]: over, come and take over everything. So I faced that resistance also. At that point
[Guest]: of time, I didn't appreciate that resistance. But now when I think back, I
[Guest]: understand where they came from. But at that time no, they were my archenemies and
[Guest]: so it was it was quite fun, college and school and I think that shaped me to a
[Amit Varma]: large extent. Did that resistance also then force you to work harder? To not, you
[Amit Varma]: know, take your own skills for granted so to say but actually work harder at
[Amit Varma]: whatever you did, I'm guessing the extracurricular activities or whatever.
[Guest]: So in my case, okay I was smart in school, right. I won all these competitions. I was
[Guest]: you know, there is this thing called children's prime minister which they
[Guest]: have in every district of Kerala. So one student wins the elocution, they become
[Guest]: Jawaharlal Nehru and they're dressed up like Jawaharlal Nehru and there's an
[Guest]: open Jeep in which they are taken through the town and you have to
[Guest]: just salute like Jawaharlal Nehru. All the school students will stand and salute.
[Guest]: When I do this, everybody thinks, oh my god she can do everything. I can't. I know
[Guest]: exactly that my skill is only this much. People may want me to, at one point I
[Guest]: thought I'll become an MBA. The second I saw the textbooks of XLRI and the
[Guest]: what is it the for the entrance exam, I was like absolutely no. I will not pass
[Guest]: this exam. Most of my friends took science. They all went for this coaching
[Guest]: classes which are terrible. They have to stay there. They have to study 20 hours I
[Guest]: think. I was like this is not for me. I cannot be a doctor or an engineer
[Guest]: anyways and science was no-no for me. So I think from my childhood I knew what I
[Guest]: was capable of and so I would only push myself in that direction. I've never
[Guest]: tried things which I am skeptical about. Like if I think I can't do an MBA, I will
[Guest]: not waste even five minutes trying to study. So I was very clear about what I
[Guest]: can do. People can have hundred perceptions about me. Like even today
[Guest]: when I'm running the news minute, everybody asks me why don't you give an
[Guest]: opinion. Like why don't you do a show like Shekhar Gupta does of like cut the
[Guest]: clutter and explain. Because I don't know most things. I may have an opinion but I
[Guest]: don't think that opinion is good enough and I don't want to be thrusting that on
[Guest]: other people. That's the reason why I don't do it. So I am very clear on what I
[Guest]: can do and what I cannot do which which has helped me quite a bit. But there are
[Guest]: times I wonder maybe I should have taken a chance with an MBA and led a very
[Guest]: peaceful life in some MNC making a lot of money and not worrying about you know
[Guest]: social media and stuff like that. But generally I think most of how I grew up
[Guest]: and what I ended up becoming is also because my parents though they were from
[Guest]: Palakkad, they were not conservative at all. I would not come back home till 8-9
[Guest]: in the night when I had a bike because we'll have a lot of events in college
[Guest]: school. But my brother doesn't come back by 6-6.30. My father be worried. Where is
[Guest]: he? Where is he? If I don't come back they will not be worried because they know
[Guest]: that I can take care of myself. And I had a boyfriend imagine in Palakkad who
[Guest]: used to come home. Nobody would blink an eye. They would not ask me. But if other
[Guest]: girls do the same thing, everybody would be shocked and they'd be like how are you
[Guest]: taking them home. My parents had no such issues. So that way they also helped me
[Guest]: become you know grow up in a certain way without any restrictions. Therefore that
[Guest]: helped. But politics in college was was also a life-altering situation I would
[Guest]: say. See when I say politics I did not understand an SFI or a KSU as an ABVP
[Guest]: for the political party represented. That was alien to me. Like I did not know the
[Guest]: BJP intricately or the Congress or the Communists. When I enter college I know a
[Guest]: lot of seniors who are with the KSU which is the Kerala Students Union. So my
[Guest]: immediate inclination is to go with them. And then by next year I have made
[Guest]: friends in SFI and ABVP also. So I'm completely confused as to what to do. But
[Guest]: in those five years by the end by the end by the time I finished college I
[Guest]: decided that this is a party I don't like. I don't like the way these people
[Guest]: behave. I appreciate the way the other one behaves. But by the end of it I
[Guest]: contested as an independent. I mean I have contested three elections. One I was
[Guest]: unanimous candidate of all three parties. The next one I was a candidate of two
[Guest]: parties and not SFI because by then we had split. By the fifth year I got tired
[Guest]: of all three and I stood alone. They all had candidates against me. So for me it
[Guest]: has been a very, the college has been a learning experience as to you know when
[Guest]: you're in a situation where there is a lot of conflict, people have different
[Guest]: opinions, do you have to go with the flow simply because you believed in that one
[Guest]: gang before you joined. So I mean I had enough friends with me who told me that
[Guest]: no just whatever you believe in if you don't agree with them you don't have to
[Guest]: go with them. Even if you don't win an election it doesn't matter. But don't
[Guest]: have to stand with someone who you don't want to stand with. So that kind of
[Guest]: resilience and that kind of a thinking I think a lot of friends and my family and
[Guest]: everybody around me did help. So I'm studying in Kerala when I then went to
[Guest]: Tamil Nadu and I went to Karnataka. I feel like students are deprived here of
[Guest]: quite a lot of things especially no campus politics. Even Kerala doesn't have
[Guest]: campus politics now and even extracurricular activities is looked down
[Guest]: beyond a point. Like my son is in fifth standard and there is so much of tension
[Guest]: in the whatsapp group among parents as to oh my god they're coming back from
[Guest]: school at 3.15 when will they prepare for the exam. So my son had a big lecture
[Guest]: for me and my husband yesterday saying what kind of parents are you don't even
[Guest]: know when my exam is. I said that's fine I mean it's not like a board exam as
[Guest]: long as you have a foundation right it's okay but he's really angry with us. But I
[Guest]: feel like if he had studied in Kerala at least the time that I did he would have
[Guest]: got so many more opportunities to do different different things. I feel like
[Guest]: many other states maybe my judgment is wrong but at in the 1980s when I studied
[Guest]: in 1990s I felt that Kerala gave much more opportunity for people to grow in
[Guest]: many different ways or at least the places I studied in. And what attracted
[Guest]: you to campus politics? So generally I'm a violent person in the sense that I can
[Guest]: I'm very vocal and if I see something in front of me I have to give my opinion
[Guest]: therefore if something is happening in the college and a college union has to
[Guest]: decide I realize that that's where the power lies of deciding something right
[Guest]: so I have to be a part of that. So my thoughts very violent also sometimes and
[Guest]: I mean I can tell you there's one election where we used to carry these
[Guest]: pocketknives with us because there would be violence there would be actual
[Guest]: physical violence so it was also a little rush throughout the college thing
[Guest]: but mainly because I realized it's the union that decides in a college even the
[Guest]: smallest things like do you want this construction to happen here do you want
[Guest]: this course to come here do you want this teacher so everything the union had
[Guest]: a say and therefore I felt like I had to be part of the union which is one reason
[Guest]: why I was interested like I said I had no I did not identify with the political
[Guest]: party or thought at that time but I did know that I want to be I want to have a
[Guest]: say in what happens in my college and to be part of the union then was very
[Amit Varma]: important. And I'm sure other people would also be in campus politics with
[Amit Varma]: because of the urge that we care about the things around us we want to be part
[Amit Varma]: of the change right but that urge dissipates at some level the higher up
[Amit Varma]: you go in terms of politics like at the national level I would say that most
[Amit Varma]: citizens are kind of apathetic and one reason for that might well be that power
[Amit Varma]: is so centralized and you don't really see a connection between your
[Amit Varma]: involvement and anything changing and all of that and the ways in which you
[Amit Varma]: are trying to make a difference today are not political ways but they are all
[Amit Varma]: these other ways which are perhaps even more important. Where do you think that
[Amit Varma]: disconnect happens that in the context of a college and what's going on there
[Amit Varma]: you are a concerned citizen as it were of the college but then you come out and
[Amit Varma]: at some level there is that disconnect where you are like I don't identify with
[Amit Varma]: this anymore there is no point my getting into this game and I'm gonna do
[Amit Varma]: other stuff is there a point where the disconnect happens or is it simply that
[Amit Varma]: here you've done your college and you're getting on with life and people just
[Guest]: move on. No see for me like I said by the end of my college years my fifth year in
[Guest]: college when I stood for the chairman post for elections I did not identify
[Guest]: with any party by then I did not want to stand in their panels but I'd still want
[Guest]: to be part of the union and I wanted to be the chairperson of the college I
[Guest]: didn't want I didn't want to exit that college without becoming its chairperson
[Guest]: so that's a risk I took at that time and I did win the election but I think
[Guest]: towards the end of my college I was watching NDTV I cannot remember whether
[Guest]: NDTV was a singular platform at that time or it was a it was on star I think
[Guest]: they used to have this show so Deva Gowda had stepped down as Prime Minister
[Guest]: now my memory is very vague but I remember Rajdeep Sardesai and some I
[Guest]: don't know if it was Barkha Dutt or Arnab Goswami but they were having this
[Guest]: really passionate debate about Deva Gowda stepping down and why again we'll
[Guest]: have an election or they were discussing about taxpayers money going down the
[Guest]: drain and then I thought this is actually a job I can do I mean they're
[Guest]: talking for other people and maybe this is something I should do that's actually
[Guest]: the first time I started looking up at journalism and I just decided that okay
[Guest]: maybe this is the course I want to look at not an MBA or anything like that but
[Guest]: I I get your question that a lot of people when they are in campus politics
[Guest]: they want change like a lot of my friends in college they were part of
[Guest]: campus politics because they felt as strongly as me and you know when I when
[Guest]: I use the word violently I mean that there are a lot of people who want
[Guest]: change but they don't do anything or they are unable to do something because
[Guest]: to be in that particular campus where everybody is very vocal and you know
[Guest]: they can even be physically violent you need to have some sort of that that
[Guest]: courage in you or or rather that to be foolish my dad used to think I was
[Guest]: foolish not just not courageous because I was in trouble all the time and those
[Guest]: people who are much more spunkier than me or much more dedicated than me in
[Guest]: college now I see a lot of them have just become your everyday citizens and
[Guest]: they're not bothered about things that happen around them and I feel that at
[Guest]: every stage they could have done something at least use a social media
[Guest]: accounts and nothing else you know to speak about things around them I don't
[Guest]: know I find it baffling that people can have a certain character while growing
[Guest]: up and it just disappears that you are very you are citizens who are really
[Guest]: bothered about what happens within your campus itself as students because you
[Guest]: are invested in that campus right you want things to change you want things to
[Guest]: happen in a certain way but when you go to a larger canvas which is the the
[Guest]: world around you your workplace you don't have an opinion anymore that you
[Guest]: are just happy to be part of the flow which does surprise me baffle me but I
[Guest]: think around eight ten years ago I stopped worrying about it I used to
[Guest]: think that we can we should change people we should make everyone more
[Guest]: reactive but now I think maybe they are all in a safer place everybody doesn't
[Guest]: have to be reactive in this world people can live in their small happy shells
[Guest]: like my brother for example he's studying the same college as me just one
[Guest]: if this part when this podcast comes out he's not going to forgive me for this
[Guest]: but he's one year younger to me and in college he did not want anybody to know
[Guest]: that I am his sister because you know he always thought that I would get beaten
[Guest]: up therefore because they can't beat up a girl they may as well as beat up her
[Guest]: brother so you don't want anyone to know that we are siblings because he will and
[Guest]: he will run after college he will not stay back but he who did not want to
[Guest]: have any involvement is now a changed person in the sense that he has a he has
[Guest]: a thought process about what happens he's vocal about it so I've seen both
[Guest]: sides I feel people who are involved in things and then suddenly they don't want
[Guest]: to know anything happening around the world and others who were not like that
[Guest]: but now are more invested in what is happening around them so I think people
[Guest]: change a lot from what they were in their campus is only very few people
[Amit Varma]: continue the same way and if your brother is listening to this boss your
[Amit Varma]: logic was perfectly sound because you know that's what they would do right yeah
[Guest]: I wish he was beaten up once or twice but it never actually happened yeah did
[Amit Varma]: you ever beat up yeah yeah of course and did you ever use your knife or did you
[Guest]: ever feel like you might use it it was just I mean it's not like we're ever
[Guest]: going to end up using that knife but we would be told by the seniors that you
[Guest]: should bring knife in case something happens there is one instance when this
[Guest]: boy was like beaten up and they used a boot and smashed his face so you can
[Guest]: imagine right in a campus when all this happens is so much of chatter and
[Guest]: tension and excitement and everything so college life was something like for many
[Guest]: people they may they may think why just go study and come back what did you
[Guest]: study I actually can't remember what I studied I just know debit what comes in
[Guest]: and credit what goes out that's all I can remember but rest of who I am that
[Amit Varma]: those five years did shape me yeah I mean I'm kind of amazed you chose commerce
[Amit Varma]: because people either do science or they do arts because they can just chill and
[Guest]: you know but commerce is just to me seems so boring and it was very
[Guest]: especially learning for the exam it was so boring I don't even know why people I
[Guest]: mean I'm sorry to everybody who loves commerce who's listening to this and
[Guest]: also it was a waste for me right I'm not even using the skill of anything that I
[Guest]: learned I now wish I'd done arts or English but I just didn't want to do
[Guest]: science and a lot of people I like were already in the commerce stream so I
[Amit Varma]: thought okay let's go join commerce and you know one of the things that strikes
[Amit Varma]: me about you know what you've been speaking about for the last few minutes
[Amit Varma]: is how different you are from both me and most of my guests who've come on the
[Amit Varma]: show because in my case of course I was not involved in politics at all but I
[Amit Varma]: remember that I wasn't fully shaped then in any way I had no clarity about what I
[Amit Varma]: want to do I had vague ideas I will write books I will do this but I was
[Amit Varma]: also struck by what I think is a uniform anxiety especially among the young when
[Amit Varma]: they start going to college which is the anxiety of what other people think of
[Amit Varma]: you so you're always trying to project yourself in this way or that way or be
[Amit Varma]: super cool and you know if I ever carried a knife the only reason I would
[Amit Varma]: do it is so that I seem cool not because I might have to actually use it the
[Amit Varma]: horror and it seems that you had way more clarity at least in terms of what
[Amit Varma]: you don't want to do that I don't want to do science or I don't want to go to
[Amit Varma]: these bloody coaching classes you had tremendous clarity and you had a sense
[Amit Varma]: of what you're doing and I guess even your parents or that when they let you
[Amit Varma]: stay out till 930 or whatever while your poor brother has to rush back at 620
[Amit Varma]: let's not define him as poor brother but yes please continue yeah okay yeah so a
[Amit Varma]: lot of this clarity I can see in terms of what you don't want to do you're very
[Amit Varma]: clear about what you don't want to do and you don't you won't do that but was
[Amit Varma]: that anxiety there in other ways and was this clarity also there in terms of what
[Amit Varma]: am I going to go ahead and do like what was your self-image like like before that
[Amit Varma]: NDTV moment I guess I was 97 if they were gonna hurt just step down before
[Amit Varma]: that moment what would have been your sort of conception of where you're going
[Guest]: and what you want to do and so on and so forth so I've actually never worried
[Guest]: about what I will become when people used to ask me what will you become I in
[Guest]: fact I don't even remember anyone really asking me what do you want to become
[Guest]: people just assumed I'll become a lot of things there was one point of time when
[Guest]: everybody used to tell me you should become an IAS officer you should become
[Guest]: an IPS officer this is all I would hear go for civil service exam and one point
[Guest]: of time I thought okay maybe I should do that and I bought my father whenever I
[Guest]: want to become something my father will say okay fine and he went goes and buys
[Guest]: all these readers digest and the Malayala Manorama yearbook and I used to
[Guest]: read all that and I'm like okay fine this is a decent job where I can also be
[Guest]: rebellious I feel like okay I am going to make the decision for an entire
[Guest]: district that's a cool job is what I'm thinking in my head then there is a
[Guest]: collector in Palakkad his name is Ajay Kumar he is now in a very big I think
[Guest]: he's now in a central deployment he was he was in a good posting I don't exactly
[Guest]: know where he is now he called me to his office because I used to be this
[Guest]: Jawaharlal Nehru and I used to see him all the time for different events so he
[Guest]: knew me and people used to tell him that Oh Danya will become an IAS officer so
[Guest]: he called me and asked me why do you want to become an IAS officer I said
[Guest]: because I will change stuff and you know I can do all this so he sat me down and
[Guest]: said I don't think you are cut out to become an IAS officer because you will
[Guest]: have to listen to a lot of people including politicians including the
[Guest]: people in the government who may not even know as much as you but you have to
[Guest]: very carefully think about this it is not a job where you just come and like
[Guest]: an elephant you smash everything and walk I mean these are not exact words he
[Guest]: used but he basically told me that civil services is something you should be very
[Guest]: careful about you won't be able to do what you want you are you have to follow
[Guest]: a lot of other people that's it that one conversation and I decided I am not
[Guest]: going to become an IAS or IPS officer so that is taken off from my mind right
[Guest]: because I cannot be in a job where somebody is constantly telling me what I
[Guest]: should do that is struck from my list then what do I do so have you seen this
[Guest]: Chitrahaar type programs yeah so Asianet used to have this song program one to
[Guest]: ten top songs during Onam holidays so I used to anchor some of those I mean I
[Guest]: don't I can't even imagine me doing that like I wear these Pattu Pavada
[Guest]: clothes and I'll be looking at the camera and saying in really hard Malayalam
[Guest]: somebody would have written it I will just look at the screen and say that in
[Guest]: the delay that so I knew I was good on TV and then I saw this NDTV thing and
[Guest]: I'm like I want to talk on behalf of people so journalism may be my thing
[Guest]: then I went in search for my for a college so I my father has four sisters
[Guest]: of which two of them were very involved in my life right from the beginning they
[Guest]: used to buy me books their name Sushila and Vijaya they used to buy me books in
[Guest]: fact Vijaya used to tell me that you should speak to the mirror like if you
[Guest]: want to speak good English look at the mirror and speak because in Kerala we
[Guest]: don't converse in English right people speak in Malayalam so she said if you
[Guest]: want to do good in elocution you have to speak to the mirror so she trained me to
[Guest]: do that they would both buy me books so they looked up all these colleges and
[Guest]: told me there's an Asian College of Journalism in Chennai I went and applied
[Guest]: and somehow I got I mean I didn't do well in the entrance by the way in the
[Guest]: entrance exam I actually did quite badly but they still called me for the
[Guest]: interview and when they called me for the interview Shashi Kumar sir asked me
[Guest]: why did you write that wrong that answer and I still couldn't remember the
[Guest]: correct answer it was a French president's name I forget it now in the 2002
[Guest]: whatever his name was yes Sarkozy I forgot again now I'm forgetting this so
[Guest]: he told me you didn't know the French president's name I said boss I'm never
[Guest]: going to report on France right so I didn't think that was important rest
[Guest]: everything I wrote so why are you I don't know why we should focus on the
[Guest]: French president then he said he definitely didn't like me I think but I
[Guest]: reminded him immediately that once upon a time he had given me a prize I won a
[Guest]: bike once and he had given the prize to me so I said sir do you remember I was
[Guest]: in that event and you gave me a bike only I think just because I went on
[Guest]: talking they gave me the admission not because I did well in the entrance exam
[Guest]: but ACG was also good it was a fun experience learning television all that
[Guest]: so I knew I want to do TV and I won't do journalism but whether I would have become
[Guest]: good at it whether I would have excelled at it I have never worried about it for
[Guest]: me I'm not a planner like I can't plan the next three months the next six
[Guest]: months I'm a very daily person even when I run the news minute one of the big
[Guest]: problems which people in my organization have against me is that I am not a
[Guest]: planner so now they plan and I'm supposed to follow which is a good thing
[Guest]: because I don't want to waste my I'm very like even if I my career didn't
[Guest]: take off or I didn't do well I don't think I would have been very worried I
[Amit Varma]: would do something else and you know many people sort of stumble into the
[Amit Varma]: things they do by a mixture of circumstances this happened that
[Amit Varma]: happened again I got here and it seems to me that even if you kind of took this
[Amit Varma]: winding road and landed up there you still nevertheless seem totally suited
[Amit Varma]: for it in the sense that you've got initiative you can speak I'm guessing
[Amit Varma]: that when it comes to chasing stories and following something you have that
[Amit Varma]: drive so do you feel that this is the thing that you were suited for that you
[Amit Varma]: actually fell into something that matched the person that you are I guess
[Guest]: so I mean I can't imagine myself doing some other job I would be very bored if
[Guest]: I was doing any other job because more than anything else I interact with so
[Guest]: many people I don't understand where if I was in a office cabin and I had to
[Guest]: look at the look at doc I'm sure I'm doing work which changes the world but
[Guest]: for me it's important that I meet different kind of people that I
[Guest]: interact with different kind of people if not then then it just stifles me I
[Guest]: don't know I feel there's no purpose therefore yes this job very well does
[Guest]: suit me if I didn't do this maybe I would be in TV in some other way maybe I
[Guest]: would have been filmmaking but I'm not very artistic therefore I would have
[Guest]: sucked at it I mean I would be there in some position or the other I don't know
[Amit Varma]: what you just said about meeting people is also very interesting because another
[Amit Varma]: of the themes that I keep addressing on my show is about sort of the difference
[Amit Varma]: between the abstract and the concrete that you know abstract notions like
[Amit Varma]: nationalism and purity and blah blah blah and their notions that really divide
[Amit Varma]: us and a lot of the negativity comes from there and it's really easy on to sit
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter and be just completely toxic and it's all abstract but when you go
[Amit Varma]: out and actually meet people you know you then those abstractions go away
[Amit Varma]: because you're encountering people in the concrete you you know you're
[Amit Varma]: actually meeting people from all kinds of different backgrounds and you're
[Amit Varma]: making friends and all of that so it becomes kind of hard to carry that
[Amit Varma]: toxicity everywhere and I think one thing that we've been doing kind of more
[Amit Varma]: and more in in this digital age which I think is a massive net positive in terms
[Amit Varma]: of how technology has empowered individuals and people like you and me
[Amit Varma]: as well but one sort of negative drawback of that is that we're not we
[Amit Varma]: don't engage enough with real people we don't actually sit down and have real
[Amit Varma]: conversations with them anymore where we are you know we're just chilling with
[Amit Varma]: them there's no agenda there's nothing functional to do those quiet moments
[Amit Varma]: have gone out of our life and so on and so forth and you are out among the
[Amit Varma]: people all the time and while it's hard to you know pinpoint if that is a factor
[Amit Varma]: or whatever do you feel that that that sets you apart from other people who
[Amit Varma]: maybe don't do that there are so many ivory tower opinion writers will be
[Amit Varma]: sitting in their you know living room somewhere writing opinion pieces about
[Amit Varma]: something that's happening somewhere but they've never actually been there while
[Amit Varma]: your whole scene is that I'm gonna go there I'm gonna talk to people I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to try to kind of understand that so you know is that something that you see
[Amit Varma]: around you quite apart from the fact that you like to meet people but that
[Amit Varma]: meeting people is good it changes you it makes you different of course I mean I
[Guest]: don't look down upon people who write opinions they are welcoming they're
[Guest]: welcome to write their opinions but I feel people should not think that that
[Guest]: opinion is what really matters or that is what is happening on the ground I
[Guest]: feel those who write opinion pieces should understand that perhaps what they
[Guest]: write is not reflective of what is happening on the ground it's but it's
[Guest]: just what they think what they feel I differentiate myself from that like
[Guest]: today morning there is a story of a rape survivor she's alleged rape in a college
[Guest]: I have a reporter who's doing the story but I I still would message that
[Guest]: survivor to just say that look we are here as we are here if you need anything
[Guest]: you can support us so for me that human communication is very very important if
[Guest]: it's a story even if we are going to tell somebody's story not tell someone's
[Guest]: story to interact with different kinds of people because everybody's problem is
[Guest]: not the same like even if when you talk about people who are angry on Twitter
[Guest]: and who talk about communalism and bigotry and all that you walk into a
[Guest]: street where there are let's say a lot of Muslims living and you have seen a
[Guest]: riot a few days ago they're not going to be reacting the exact same way that you
[Guest]: want them to react they have different concerns in life they want their
[Guest]: children to go to school safely the next day they want their shop to open for
[Guest]: them it's not about immediately defeating someone in the next election
[Guest]: right which may be what you are thinking that's their immediate agenda that's not
[Guest]: their immediate agenda is just getting back to their lives so everywhere you go
[Guest]: and you meet people you understand that their needs what they want is very
[Guest]: different from what you think they want even the hijab story which we have been
[Guest]: covering for so many weeks there are so many people who write to us even from
[Guest]: the Muslim community itself saying that we are against this we are for this so
[Guest]: there are so many opinions right so how do you condense all that opinion to
[Guest]: write into an into an opinion piece I think I'm not I I'm not someone who
[Guest]: cannot do that like I said in the beginning cut the clutter it's not my
[Guest]: it's not my game because first I feel that it's too much onus on one human
[Guest]: being to just have an opinion about everything under the Sun and the second
[Guest]: is if I'm going to give my opinion I have also I also have to be open to
[Guest]: criticism and that's like another whole cycle of anger and outrage and people
[Guest]: are like why did you say this why did you not say that I would rather not do
[Guest]: it just do ground reporting help my reporters and that's about it but I
[Guest]: think in India we have to understand that 15 years ago if we just had news
[Guest]: which is looking at side A side B side C and putting it out together we cannot
[Guest]: afford to do that anymore if side A is right side B is toxic then you have to
[Guest]: call side B right so the way we report has changed and for that also you need
[Guest]: to interact with people more see the pandemic has changed journalism quite a
[Guest]: bit in India and two years is a long time a lot of people who are joining
[Guest]: organizations now are not stepping out of their houses they are sitting
[Guest]: somewhere they're making phone calls and they're talking to people there is only
[Guest]: this much that a person will tell you if you call them over a phone call if they
[Guest]: know you they've heard of you maybe they will open up but it's still not
[Guest]: comparable to you actually going and meeting them and understanding them
[Guest]: maybe you will not use most of it for your story but it's very important for
[Guest]: you as a journalist to understand perspectives so that way for me when you
[Guest]: talk about abstract and concrete abstract never works but that's just me
[Guest]: I said I can only process daily stuff but for many others maybe like I have
[Guest]: people in my team who can actually understand something happening on the
[Guest]: ground and they can write strong opinion pieces that's fine it's their job they
[Guest]: can write it but the person who reads it also should should know that this is not
[Guest]: the only one opinion that matters read more understand more you know I think
[Amit Varma]: just thinking aloud you know if cut the clutter is kind of one kind of thing
[Amit Varma]: that you need you also need that but there is also embrace the clutter which
[Amit Varma]: seems to be more what reporters need to do that actually go out there and engage
[Amit Varma]: with the complexity of the world and I think even people who do opinion pieces
[Amit Varma]: I have written a fair bit of opinion in my time at least have to have the
[Amit Varma]: humility to realize that there is a real world out there you always have to be
[Amit Varma]: open to kind of engaging with it like Abhinandan when we did our episode
[Amit Varma]: together he told me this interesting story of something he realized when he
[Amit Varma]: was in the Northeast where they went to this village which was pretty remote and
[Amit Varma]: they asked the people that what do you want the government to do for you and
[Amit Varma]: those guys said we want them to build a cinema hall so that's what I said yeah
[Amit Varma]: and I've been and the logic is fantastic because Abhinandan and gang are like
[Amit Varma]: really surprised and they're like but you know you would want roads you
[Amit Varma]: wouldn't want it things with positive externalities more toilets and these
[Amit Varma]: guys are no we need entertainment in our lives we go to nearby cities for that
[Amit Varma]: people die in car accidents that death rate is high just give us something in
[Amit Varma]: the village and that's something somebody who embraces the clutter a
[Amit Varma]: reporter like you will find that out but somebody sitting in Delhi and doing an
[Guest]: opinion piece will have absolutely no idea so Amit I'm saying the people who
[Guest]: write opinion pieces I like I said I don't look down upon their work at all
[Guest]: yeah I watch I watch cut the clutter all the time but my point is I am NOT
[Guest]: suited for that job and yes the problem with what Abhinandan said is that
[Guest]: nowadays if if a reporter is being sent to to the Northeast and the village says
[Guest]: that I want a cinema hall and I'm not bothered about your positive developments
[Guest]: or voting for or against a party and the reporter says look boss in that village
[Guest]: they want a cinema hall that's the biggest problem the editor may say no
[Guest]: but I want those three quotes from you where they are saying that I am against
[Guest]: the BJP for the BJP I'm for the Congress I'm against the Congress so this is
[Guest]: another problem which we are imposing on people who work with us and I also have
[Guest]: done that I'm not saying I haven't there are many times reporters have gone to
[Guest]: the field found something else and I'd be like no you have to find the other
[Guest]: thing because in my mind I've made made that up right I've made that angle in my
[Guest]: mind and I have also figured out the headline so I want a story constructed
[Guest]: around it but I do actively tell myself that that's not how it is you have been
[Guest]: a ground reporter you cannot be imposing your thoughts on a ground reporter so
[Guest]: that's a reminder I give myself all the time but I think when we become very
[Guest]: desk driven when the desk takes a lot of calls and the reporter see something
[Guest]: very different on the ground we still want them to write according to our
[Guest]: sensibilities that's something we all have to stop whether it's the hijab
[Guest]: issue whatever issue you're covering the Sabarimala issue you you have made up
[Guest]: your mind right we should not we should stop doing that and I as I read more
[Guest]: stories I feel like reporters are also trying to fill in that image which that
[Guest]: organization has or sometimes they don't even tell you the reality like they feel
[Guest]: something has happened on the ground which is not exactly correct it's
[Guest]: questionable but they feel they have to write in a certain way that's only then
[Guest]: the audience will appreciate them or that echo chamber will feel happy that they have been
[Guest]: validated so we all have to move out of those of those echo chambers you know
[Amit Varma]: take me through more of your sort of journalism journey you're at ACJ and
[Amit Varma]: you've kind of done journalism and I'm curious also about how people form their
[Amit Varma]: conceptions about what journalism is because I kind of grew up in the 80s
[Amit Varma]: started working in the mid 90s I'm probably three or four years older than
[Amit Varma]: you I'm guessing everyone who kind of got into journalism then I mean I didn't
[Amit Varma]: but many of my peers did that was just the age before journalism schools right
[Amit Varma]: that is also the age before the internet so you're not exposed to global
[Amit Varma]: journalism you're not not exposed to books on journalism you're not exposed
[Amit Varma]: to different views of how journalism should be conducted and there's no one
[Amit Varma]: training you so you're pretty much learning on the job and many of India's
[Amit Varma]: media houses at the time if not all don't really have any kind of induction
[Amit Varma]: scene going on where you're taught the values of the game you're taught the
[Amit Varma]: craft in a systematic way none of that really happens which is why for a lot of
[Amit Varma]: people it becomes like a functional thing you're not getting meta and
[Amit Varma]: thinking about it one step ahead in terms of what are my values what am I
[Amit Varma]: really trying to do what does a journalist do you know and all of those
[Amit Varma]: things so what was that process for you like of forming a view or what is this
[Amit Varma]: thing called journalism because initially when we notice journalism we
[Amit Varma]: notice oh there's an article in a page and someone went out and reported or oh
[Amit Varma]: there's this TV show happening and an anchor is cutting to a reporter and the
[Amit Varma]: reporter has spoken to two people and that's a bare bones of it but there's
[Amit Varma]: obviously so much else behind that including that whole value system so how
[Amit Varma]: did your thinking about journalism kind of evolve through the years so from the
[Guest]: first part of my story you must have thought that I am very clear on what I
[Guest]: want to do etc okay then I end up in this journalism school I pass out and I
[Guest]: freaking have no clue what to do after this because I don't know how to be a
[Guest]: journalist it's very cool to think I am a journalist and I've got a job so my
[Guest]: first job was with this Malayalam channel called India vision it was
[Guest]: actually the first 24-hour news channel that Kerala got and Shashi Kumar was a
[Guest]: part of the channel so he made a few of us join it three or four of us and they
[Guest]: told me you go to the Delhi Bureau and I am in charge of the Delhi Bureau for a
[Guest]: new channel and along with me is one woman camera person and another reporter
[Guest]: who is a student in Jamia and that's it I'm supposed to look after the Delhi
[Guest]: Bureau of the channel and I have no freaking clue about Delhi I don't know
[Guest]: anything I just land up in Delhi and they've given us a house and said this
[Guest]: is your office come house you do whatever you want we're staying there
[Guest]: we're working there my first story I will never forget it was a it was a
[Guest]: nurse who got raped she was a Malayali nurse and in that hospital the ward boy
[Guest]: had raped her and he gouged the eye out he took her eye out like it was falling
[Guest]: when she woke up in the morning after the rape she realized that her eye was
[Guest]: just like falling off and they had to remove it so it was a first story I I
[Guest]: reached the hospital and all the Malayali reporters realized I am this Malayali
[Guest]: woman journalist and they were all too I mean you know as a man sometimes it's
[Guest]: difficult to speak to survivors or survivors families so they sent me
[Guest]: inside to talk to the victim and the family that was my first story but after
[Guest]: that I never I mean I kept in touch with that story for a long time this is a
[Guest]: very famous case where it went to the court and the court said why don't you
[Guest]: marry this guy and the woman just lost in the court and asked the judge why why
[Guest]: should I marry him but I have not been able to find her I've been looking for
[Guest]: her for many years but I've never been able to find her after that now this was
[Guest]: my first story but my later career in in India vision in Delhi was not at all
[Guest]: like this because in Delhi it was set to work I mean I can't remember the timings
[Guest]: but 2 p.m. you go to CPM office 3 p.m. you go to BJP office 4 p.m. you go to
[Guest]: Congress office you cover all their press meets come back and you cut your
[Guest]: packages CPM said this and so I knew lunch I will eat in BJP office evening
[Guest]: snack I will get in very less salary right so evening snack I will get in
[Guest]: Congress office and my life went on like that I had nothing much to do if some
[Guest]: big crime happens or I mean what would a Kerala audience do with a crime in Delhi
[Guest]: but if something important happens I would be sent I went to Rajasthan to
[Guest]: cover elections I have no clue what I'm doing I interviewed so many politicians
[Guest]: without understanding the basics because I'm not reading anything I'm not
[Guest]: watching anything I'm just being sent to places saying go interview people and I
[Guest]: will just trust my mic and ask three nonsensical questions and they will
[Guest]: answer I'm like yeah I got my exclusive that's it and by the end of my stay in
[Guest]: Delhi it was a 2004 elections and I still remember watching Anubhav Bosley
[Guest]: Nidhi Rasdan, Pallavi Ghosh and all outside the various offices I will never
[Guest]: forget there was this one meeting the NCP and the Congress decide to come
[Guest]: together so Sharath Pawar and Sonia Gandhi and everybody's in the meeting
[Guest]: and I have no clue what is happening I'm just waiting for the press meet because
[Guest]: when the press meet happens I will know right but I'm getting calls from my
[Guest]: channel saying NDTV is breaking that Sharath Pawar and Sonia Gandhi or whatever
[Guest]: they have decided to come together I don't know how the press meet is going
[Guest]: has not started even then I don't know how to build a source eight months I've
[Guest]: been there I don't have a single source in the NCP or the Congress people sitting
[Guest]: next to me have got their seniors they've got sources and they've been
[Guest]: they're getting SMS from inside the meeting and I'm like that's how you
[Guest]: build source it's not enough that you cover a press meet anyway I got tired of
[Guest]: the entire Delhi business because you can't do anything in Delhi you just have
[Guest]: to go like a cow herd the cow herd goes to BJP office all everybody goes there
[Guest]: together I mean it was just too irritating too robotic so I said I'm
[Guest]: that's a screw Delhi I'm gonna go away from Delhi and I went to Chennai and I
[Guest]: didn't have a job and I had my loan to pay so I definitely had to get a job
[Guest]: immediately I walked in New Indian Express office and I said I need a job
[Guest]: they said we don't have vacancy now I said no but I really need you look at my
[Guest]: resume I worked in Delhi and actually they were quite nice they gave me a job
[Guest]: they said okay join next week and I joined the New Indian Express and first
[Guest]: they put me in the features team I was so bad at it so bad at it that the
[Guest]: features team head his name is Joy he went and told the reporting team that
[Guest]: after one or two weeks he said you take her on reporting she may be good in
[Guest]: reporting then I went to the reporting team again no sources I don't know what
[Guest]: to do and TN Gopalan was the head of reporting and D Suresh Kumar Jairaj lot
[Guest]: of good journalists in Tamil Nadu TN Gopalan also threatened me saying that
[Guest]: you don't know anything I'll take you back into features with features is
[Guest]: actually a very good department to be in but those times we used to think that oh
[Guest]: my god writing about pop culture no I just want to be where Jayalalitha and
[Guest]: Karnanidhi are and all that I said sir give me one chance I will do it so he
[Guest]: said okay you go to the assembly and I went with this with another senior
[Guest]: reporter I went to the assembly with him and Jayalalitha is a chief minister then
[Guest]: so I'm sitting in the assembly and I can't stop talking I'm so excited that
[Guest]: Jayalalitha is there and you know this assembly is going on so I'm like person
[Guest]: sitting next to me I'm continuously whispering and then Jayalalitha just
[Guest]: looks sideways and then she can see me speak talking and continuously I'm
[Guest]: talking then after sometime she writes a chit and I don't know anything so I'm
[Guest]: just sitting quietly I go back to office and I'm called by the resident editor
[Guest]: into the office and bureau chief and everybody's standing and they said
[Guest]: Jayalalitha asked who is that girl who's talking so much in the assembly you
[Guest]: cannot go back to the assembly my assembly coverage was cut and I was put
[Guest]: back into health group I was first a crime reporter two days I survived I
[Guest]: went to the commissioner's office and I was so put off by you know all these
[Guest]: crime reporters sitting there and they're just taking down notes and I'm
[Guest]: like I don't want to do this so I went and told him I don't want to do this I'll do
[Guest]: health reporting and I was clueless in that also for a long time but there's
[Guest]: this person called Pushpa Narayan she's a health editor of Times of India now
[Guest]: she was getting transferred to Bangalore she sat down with me and she
[Guest]: taught me how to write how to write a lead how to make a source like you said
[Guest]: the organization did not have time both the organizations never had any time just
[Guest]: because okay I was like I have interviewed Gehlot in Rajasthan and I
[Guest]: was only only one Malayalam reporter who got it not just not because I knew
[Guest]: anything about Gehlot or Rajasthan politics I was just I could push my way
[Guest]: through and get anybody's interview that was my only skill till then but Pushpa
[Guest]: told me this is not how you do it it's not enough that you're just a pushy
[Guest]: person you have to get your story and she taught me how to write a story how
[Guest]: to get a source and many other journalists did but by then I got tired
[Guest]: of print also I'm like this is not my cup of tea I have to go back to TV and
[Amit Varma]: that's how I ended up joining Times Now. Wonderful so we have finally reached the
[Amit Varma]: point where you are Arnab's colleague so what was Times Now like like did you
[Amit Varma]: have a clearer idea of what do you want to do there what kind of stories do you
[Amit Varma]: want to cover did you have a better idea of that once you're there? See I had made
[Guest]: up my mind that I will join IBM because Rajdeep Sardesai is someone I really
[Guest]: wanted to work with and when I left this India version I messaged him he said I
[Guest]: have also left NDTV so sorry you have to ask NDTV then when I left
[Guest]: Internet Express he said I mean he doesn't know me or anything but he just
[Guest]: would reply to messages very politely then I'm like I made up my mind I am
[Guest]: joining Rajdeep Sardesai's Chennai team because he has got he's starting a new channel
[Guest]: so I've got an interview with Arnab Goswami on Monday the very next day I
[Guest]: have an interview in Delhi with Rajdeep Sardesai so that's it I'm like I have to
[Guest]: go for the Times Now interview because somebody has set it up for me I'll go
[Guest]: there I they'll offer me a job I'm very sure I mean I'm like that okay I'm never
[Guest]: thinking I'll not get a job I'll say no and I'll go to IBM and there I will get
[Guest]: the job I go for this interview and I'm I did not expect I did not know much
[Guest]: about Arnab Goswami except that I've seen him on TV but I didn't realize what
[Guest]: a forceful personality he is so he asked me do you know Tamil I said yes I mean I
[Guest]: didn't know Tamil and I mean I was pretty sure if he's going to make me
[Guest]: read something in Tamil I can make up and he anyway can't read Tamil right so
[Guest]: and then he gave me the job immediately and he said you have to join from
[Guest]: tomorrow I said but sir I can't join I don't even have clothes I've just come
[Guest]: for one day he said no I'll give you an allowance of 10,000 rupees you please go
[Guest]: buy clothes you have to stay here for one month your training will start from
[Guest]: tomorrow I'm like I don't know if I should he said no that's it you're just
[Guest]: joining and he was so forceful I did not know how to say no and he they gave me
[Guest]: the money I went and bought clothes that's it I joined Times Now that's how
[Guest]: my career in Times Now starts initially you know in TV when you're the junior
[Guest]: reporter in a bureau they'll make you do all kinds of rubbish Arnab shows the
[Guest]: night get two vox pops is my job so Arnab is doing some show I'm just on the
[Guest]: road asking people for opinions or Arnab is doing this one big story so you go
[Guest]: get five or not even Arnab it'll be somebody else in the organization they
[Guest]: are doing some big story in Delhi some politics is happening so you go get two
[Guest]: or three politicians so at that point of time there were very few TV reporters
[Guest]: there was NDTV then IBM started then us and headlines today so imagine I come
[Guest]: from a time when the other reporters would not even share numbers of
[Guest]: politicians their Kanimozhi's number Dayanidhi Maran's number people would
[Guest]: not give me they'll say it's a personal number they don't like to give personal
[Guest]: numbers to everyone so it was as if it was it is bloody somebody's number give
[Guest]: it to me they will not give so I realized that I can end my entire life I
[Guest]: can spend just getting vox pops and accosting a Maran or a Kanimozhi and
[Guest]: getting their bites without ever knowing them without building a source and I
[Guest]: realized I have to do something else and I planned it I thought okay I will do
[Guest]: some investigations because anyway they're not going to let me do politics
[Guest]: and I don't want to do anything else so I planned a few investigations and it
[Guest]: actually clicked quite well for times now it became CBI investigation and all
[Guest]: that stuff so they also started taking me more seriously this happened within
[Guest]: two or three months but the reason I said this Kanimozhi Dayanidhi Maran thing
[Guest]: is that that was how journalism was it was very access based you have access to
[Guest]: a person okay fine you know everything and and people would block access for
[Guest]: everyone else so one decision I took in the beginning itself is that if I get a
[Guest]: number I will give it to everybody I mean unless it's a it's a survivor in a
[Guest]: sexual violence who doesn't want me to give or someone says I don't want my
[Guest]: number to be given if it's a politician who's supposed to talk to every channel
[Guest]: they would their number will be there with everyone I mean I wanted to make
[Guest]: sure the Chennai where I work did not have the same access journalism which
[Guest]: Delhi followed and Delhi I think still follows it you are you are a good
[Guest]: journalist if you have access to people and a lot of it is cut off because
[Guest]: people don't share numbers they will not tell you sources they will not share
[Guest]: anything which I think is very problematic so anyway that's how times
[Guest]: now started I did well I did investigations it went off well then
[Guest]: thankfully my bureau chief left the bureau and I was made the bureau chief I
[Guest]: grew along with the channel and soon I was shifted to Bangalore where I was
[Guest]: made in charge of all the four southern bureaus there was no Telangana at that
[Guest]: time it was just unified Andhra Pradesh so I was in charge of all the four
[Guest]: bureaus it was a good experience and it was a bad experience but by the end of
[Guest]: eight years I worked eight years in times now I was done with TV so why was
[Amit Varma]: it a good experience and why was it a bad experience you really want me to
[Guest]: talk about times now in detail and all numbers no I mean it's you right we're
[Guest]: talking about you so okay so it was a good experience because in the beginning
[Guest]: here they actually taught me they told me what they want I may not have agreed
[Guest]: with most of the things they wanted me to do but at least there was a system in
[Guest]: place where there were a lot of seniors like they are all doing well in
[Guest]: different different professions Maharukhi Naya, Deepthi, Rahul so many
[Guest]: people were there they're very indulgent they would tell me Tamanna, Rupali
[Guest]: lot of seniors in times now they're very indulgent they would help me they
[Guest]: will tell me get this get this is how you get your elements so it was sorted
[Guest]: for me my bureau chief Vivek he heads news 18 southern channels now so they
[Guest]: all allowed me to experiment and they were very encouraging that can you
[Guest]: imagine in times now I have done a one and a half week show on adoptions
[Guest]: illegal adoptions in India that's something you can't imagine a national
[Guest]: channel doing anymore but Arnab has sat on news hour and for one and a half
[Guest]: weeks he's discussed only this illegal adoptions so at that point of time it
[Guest]: was a platform where if you could bring a story and if you could sell your story
[Guest]: now it's not enough that you bring a good story you should know how to sell
[Guest]: it you're like a marketing person the story should be good and you're the way
[Guest]: you sell it should be so good that Arnab is like this is my so it is always your
[Guest]: goal is that your story is either in the 8 p.m. show or the 9 p.m. show otherwise
[Guest]: it's just something which disappears in every bulletin so that way it was good
[Guest]: there were a chunk of reporters like around 10 or 12 of us who Arnab allowed
[Guest]: to grow along with the organization and it was a learning process but I think in
[Guest]: a few years time not only the fact that the newsroom was very toxic that was
[Guest]: right from the beginning it was toxic but for me personally it was not a
[Guest]: problem because I was not sitting in Delhi or Bombay I was not inside the
[Guest]: newsroom right I was far away and I was sort of also it sort of also helped
[Guest]: because I had some access to Jaya Lalitha now that is an access which I
[Guest]: can't give to everybody because it's not like I can just pick up my call pick up
[Guest]: phone and call her but there was some access I had so that also gave me some
[Guest]: cushioning in times now people knew okay if we can get and Jaya Lalitha's
[Guest]: interview is very big in TV at that time even even M. Karunanidhi for that matter
[Guest]: but he was much more democratic that way he would talk to everybody he would come
[Guest]: out and just give bites Jaya Lalitha would never do it but after a point of time I
[Guest]: realized that the same issue which I described some time back that even if I
[Guest]: think of a story in a certain way I've gone to the ground and found something
[Guest]: the channel has decided that this is the story this is the angle I'm taking now
[Guest]: if my source on the ground is saying no this is not true also it doesn't matter
[Guest]: to the channel they are still going to do the angle in the other way and this
[Guest]: became a constant conflict like I've covered scams big national scams like
[Guest]: the ISRO scam the ISRO Devas scam or so many other things and I realized that
[Guest]: most of what we are projecting is actually not true but even when I say
[Guest]: that this is not true boss we shouldn't be doing this we are just making victims
[Guest]: of people who are actually not done anything wrong nobody would understand
[Guest]: because the channel has decided this is my headline today the reporter only has
[Guest]: to fill the gap and soon everybody in the channel started behaving like that
[Guest]: so it just got too much for me beyond a point so one you you have a toxic news
[Guest]: room second you are just filling the gap of the headline basically they have
[Guest]: decided this is it and that's that's the angle you take and third is this
[Guest]: marketing of a story is so much more difficult for a person sitting in South
[Guest]: India now if I am in Delhi or Bombay even like small pillar falling somewhere
[Guest]: is a story or Bal Thackeray sneezes it's a story at the same time I tell them
[Guest]: this is how this big event has happened in Chennai nobody bothers unless it is
[Guest]: JL Lathore Karunanidhi imagine Karnataka and all they would not cover at all till
[Guest]: BS Yadurappa and his mining scam came there was hardly any coverage right so
[Guest]: to market your story continuously like convince people sitting in a Delhi and
[Guest]: Bombay desk it was it was really hard and when I became the South India Bureau
[Guest]: chief I'm also responsible for so many others who work with me and they are
[Guest]: also asking me why is my story not taken I remember the specific instant when my
[Guest]: colleague Ram he is with me in the news minute now he was very he was 21 years
[Guest]: old then I think very bubbly very passionate he said I won't do a story on
[Guest]: Naxals and he's a Tamil Nadu reporter but I still tell Arnab I said boss he
[Guest]: has some source let him go to Mangalore he wants to do a story from Mangalore on
[Guest]: the Naxals there he goes there he spends two or three days with the Naxals and he
[Guest]: comes back and he's got their accounts right so he's got these papers the
[Guest]: second I saw the paper I knew the story is not going the reason why is because
[Guest]: the accounts are very simple they are writing grocery some five thousand bucks
[Guest]: or they're writing some you know chapati dosa or clothes or whatever it's very
[Guest]: simple accounts that they're maintaining now times now till then has built up this
[Guest]: great image of Naxals as terrorists we were asked to call Naxals as terrorist
[Guest]: Naxals and I know people who quit the channel because they disagreed to call
[Guest]: them terrorist Naxals so the moment Ram brings his story I understand the story
[Guest]: is not going because it goes against that channels assertion that there is
[Guest]: Chinese fund there is Pakistani fund they are flush with funds and they have
[Guest]: ak-47 I mean I'm not contesting that Naxal movements have not got funds from
[Guest]: other places but a story goes against the grain of what you have argued till
[Guest]: today the story is rejected this boy is so upset for days how am I going to
[Guest]: convince him that it's fine move on to your next story right because it's a
[Guest]: daily job you have to just keep keeping keep on moving so at one point of time
[Guest]: it got very tiring for me I did not want to do it anymore I specifically remember
[Guest]: there was violence in the Madras High Court violence to the skillet I had not
[Guest]: seen till then inside a court there is lathi charge there is stone throwing a
[Guest]: police station is burnt inside judges are being lathi charged and I'm the
[Guest]: first television reporter who reached there and my camera person has been hit
[Guest]: by a stone and I've got really great visuals of you know like hundreds of
[Guest]: policemen on one side hundreds of lawyers on the other side and they're
[Guest]: just charging at each other and I'm telling them take the damn visual and
[Guest]: they're like no something has happened in Bombay I'm like just cut live to me
[Guest]: then nobody's cutting that finally I called Arnab and said why am I doing
[Guest]: this job it's the biggest visual story then he said see at least he was someone
[Guest]: who could recognize it so you say okay cut but on a daily basis to argue for a
[Guest]: story like this is very tiring and it's demotivating and I always felt that any
[Guest]: South Indian story I had to market five times more than somebody sitting in
[Guest]: Kashmir because time's not a Kashmir obsession and somebody sitting in Delhi
[Guest]: or Bombay for me the decision to really leave TV came because of Savita
[Guest]: Harlapana was death in Ireland she was a nurse who hailed from Karnataka and no
[Guest]: she was I can't remember if she's a nurse but she was from Karnataka and she
[Guest]: was working in Ireland and she had a very unsafe pregnancy but Ireland would
[Guest]: not allow abortions and she had to go through the childbirth and she died of
[Guest]: course many many years later Ireland has got a law now which allows abortion only
[Guest]: because of Savita Harlapana was death and what happened then so we had the
[Guest]: story with us we are the first people to get Savita Harlapana was you know
[Guest]: parents in Belgaum and her husband in Ireland I had all my elements ready but
[Guest]: Bal Thackeray was in hospital and the story wouldn't go and Bal Thackeray didn't
[Guest]: die the next day the next day and I said see he didn't die he's still in the
[Guest]: hospital why can't you carry the story and they decide to carry the story and
[Guest]: Bal Thackeray dies and then this whole cycle of Bal Thackeray's funeral
[Guest]: procession this that and I thought that you know you could have given 20 minutes
[Guest]: for Savita Harlapana she died and it was an important story to be told you don't
[Guest]: have to have 24 hours coverage of Bal Thackeray dying is also very important
[Guest]: I'm not saying it is not but you don't have to dedicate yourself to do only
[Guest]: that that was the time I decided I cannot do this anymore if I go for a new
[Guest]: job it will be in a place where I don't have to fight for my region I would
[Guest]: rather join a Tamil channel or a Malayalam news channel at least do my job
[Guest]: properly I don't have to constantly fight for making my story heard so one
[Amit Varma]: of the trends that I've noticed and I've been thinking about more and more and
[Amit Varma]: the reason I've been thinking about it more and more is that once I noticed it
[Amit Varma]: it seems to be everywhere and it that's basically the dissipation of the
[Amit Varma]: mainstream and the complete decentralization in a number of
[Amit Varma]: industries one of them obviously journalism because in the 90s you have
[Amit Varma]: this big behemoth mainstream media houses and you've got a consensus on the
[Amit Varma]: truth and everything is coming from there and in the way that you just
[Amit Varma]: describe it like what you're describing really seems to be a really top-down
[Amit Varma]: central thing that is happening you see the blindness of people with narrow
[Amit Varma]: visions and they're not really catering to the whole country they've got their
[Amit Varma]: preconceptions and their stereotypes and therefore the stories they want reported
[Amit Varma]: come out of there and if they don't conform with the real world that's too
[Amit Varma]: bad for the real world but I just feel that in media certainly the mainstream
[Amit Varma]: is dissipating the way we consume stuff is coming everywhere from the edges and
[Amit Varma]: it's happening across a number of margins it's happening in music for
[Amit Varma]: example the East Street band's guitarist Steve Van Zandt spoke in an interview
[Amit Varma]: about how rock was mainstream for you know from Beatles and Dylan turning
[Amit Varma]: electric to Nirvana and now there's no mainstream anymore everything is all
[Amit Varma]: over the place you see that happening maybe with nation states that nation
[Amit Varma]: states you know their control is dissipating because individuals are
[Amit Varma]: empowered with technologies and so on now it strikes me that in the context of
[Amit Varma]: the news minute I've even heard in previous interviews where you've spoken
[Amit Varma]: about you've referred to it or the whoever was speaking to you has referred
[Amit Varma]: to it as a niche and I don't actually think it's a niche I don't think it's a
[Amit Varma]: niche because I think what will happen over a period of time is not that these
[Amit Varma]: big behemoths in the center will survive and there'll be just a whole bunch of
[Amit Varma]: niches which feels like a very condescending way of putting it I just
[Amit Varma]: think that news will get more and more decentralized more and more local where
[Amit Varma]: you you might have a channel for the south and then you might have a channel
[Amit Varma]: for Karnataka and then you might have something for the Mysore area and you
[Amit Varma]: know different specific ways of serving people and you kind of get more and more
[Amit Varma]: decentralized and therefore the mainstream is irrelevant is that
[Amit Varma]: something you've seen I mean in a sense it would appear that you almost became
[Amit Varma]: an accidental participant in this it is not as if you plan this that this is a
[Amit Varma]: vision this is how it's going to evolve and we obviously we'll talk about a
[Amit Varma]: journey a lot more about the news minute journey but just at a broader level you
[Amit Varma]: know what are your thoughts on this because I look at everything that the
[Amit Varma]: mainstream media serves us and what you've described is true of any industry
[Amit Varma]: right and this is also why big companies collapse so often when disruptors
[Amit Varma]: come up and what often then happens is that disruptors become big
[Amit Varma]: companies and they become you know elephants which can't move and then
[Amit Varma]: other disruptors come but I'm not sure that it happened necessarily in you know
[Amit Varma]: the way things are kind of working out so what are your sort of thoughts on that
[Guest]: so I think already there is a decentralization of news there is no
[Guest]: doubt about it for example the news minute we have decentralized news to a
[Guest]: large extent and there are many other examples like us like there is news
[Guest]: meter which does only Hyderabad news there is the queue in Malayalam which
[Guest]: does only a true copy there are lots of people like that right but I am someone
[Guest]: in my head I'm very clear I will not disregard or write off the mainstream
[Guest]: media because there's certain utility to it considering our government sits in
[Guest]: Delhi and they monitor the mainstream media most right so which is the reason
[Guest]: why the mainstream media has the responsibility of reporting things from
[Guest]: across the country simply because they are the messengers to the government to
[Guest]: people in the bureaucracy in Delhi I see no other utility for national media as
[Guest]: they call it I don't see any importance of a story on any of the national
[Guest]: channels unless the government has to know about it if it's a story where only
[Guest]: the state government has to know about it the people have to know about it I
[Guest]: won't even bother like there are many times I send stories to national editor
[Guest]: saying please pick it up reason being I think that okay the news minute has done
[Guest]: it maybe a Deccan Chronicle has done it or somebody here has done it that's not
[Guest]: enough I feel that someone from Delhi should do it because that's when you
[Guest]: that's when the government listens right so only for utility purpose I am I still
[Guest]: think the mainstream media should exist if our government and bureaucracy starts
[Guest]: looking at all states and all media separately then fine we don't even need
[Guest]: a national media right now the other problem here is that this decentralization
[Guest]: that we talk is also very concentrated on in certain states and they don't have
[Guest]: the resources to cover everything for example I run the news minute I have
[Guest]: reporters in five states how many reporters two reporters per state can I
[Guest]: write every story I cannot I am also mainly city centric because when an
[Guest]: event of news happens I send people outside the city and we are actually
[Guest]: better off and a lot of other people who don't even have that many resources so
[Guest]: the decentralization also is not happening properly simply because lack
[Guest]: of resources and nobody wants to put money in use the other problem is even
[Guest]: this decentralization of news which has happened with a crop of digital sites
[Guest]: coming right like the wire the quint scroll the news minute and all that is
[Guest]: in English you are catering to an audience who reads English speaks in
[Guest]: English understands English that is not a large section of India what is the
[Guest]: decentralization of news in Tamil or Malayalam or Telugu I know only about
[Guest]: the five states here I know there is independent media to some extent in
[Guest]: Kerala but even that is not very well read the reach is not very good
[Guest]: Tamil there's hardly anything Telugu no absolutely no Karnataka very few sites
[Guest]: so this decentralization is also very English specific it has not happened in
[Guest]: a large way in other languages so even if the word niche perhaps is looking is
[Guest]: a bit condescending as you said the point is we have not even built those
[Guest]: niches we have not built we have not been successful if news minutes started
[Guest]: in 2014 at that time a lot of websites started I mean we are just six months
[Guest]: before our scroll started six months after us the wire started but beyond
[Guest]: that what have we seen like I head digipub an association of digital media
[Guest]: organizations we have 90 members I have not heard of at least 16 that and I am
[Guest]: in the industry and when I look at those websites I know that they are just SEO
[Guest]: based and they put whatever stuff that's it other than that we have a few new
[Guest]: ones recently like article 14 which are doing very specific very specialized
[Guest]: work right so in a huge country like India if you want to decentralize news
[Guest]: also we need more people to come and support these organizations we need more
[Guest]: organizations to come up it's only that why did a lot of Dalit thinkers for
[Guest]: example start Velli Vada and so many other websites because there was no
[Guest]: void no platform was giving their voice as it is needed to be given which is why
[Guest]: they started it right they these are different things but I'm saying at some
[Guest]: point of time we will need all these voices to come together also and become
[Guest]: one powerful voice which which the government cannot ignore them which
[Guest]: which even people sitting in Delhi will know okay this is happening so
[Guest]: decentralization I feel is a very small exercise till now it's not happened to a
[Guest]: large extent it has to happen more and more only then will it mean anything I
[Guest]: mean we have seen the kind of resistance which only a like 10 or 15 sites can put
[Guest]: up to a new story which is evolving we understand the perspective that they can
[Guest]: bring to the table imagine if that's a huge exercise and there are people in
[Guest]: various languages contributing to that how much it will change the landscape of
[Amit Varma]: our country so I want to double click on a bunch of things here and and the first
[Amit Varma]: of them that I find very interesting is that you spoke about how the mainstream
[Amit Varma]: media is relevant only because you know people in Delhi will then listen to your
[Amit Varma]: politicians or people in power and so on and so forth and I've always sort of
[Amit Varma]: thought of journalism as a whole purpose is that you're catering to people you
[Amit Varma]: know and of course you speak truth to power and of course you afflict the
[Amit Varma]: comfortable and all of that is there but essentially your audience is the people
[Amit Varma]: at large and you're giving them what knowledge perspectives news first draft
[Amit Varma]: of history all of that I never thought of one purpose of journalism as being
[Amit Varma]: actually speaking to the government in power so they make a difference and I
[Amit Varma]: would actually have thought that if that worked it would work before you go to
[Amit Varma]: the people first and then if there is a bottom of expression then you know the
[Amit Varma]: people in power will actually change something why will they change something
[Amit Varma]: just because a journalist is after something but obviously I'm wrong
[Guest]: because you've said that that's how it works out so can you see national media
[Guest]: I mean the TV media I'm not talking about newspapers at all but can you give
[Amit Varma]: me an example of how coverage by mainstream media of something especially
[Amit Varma]: if it's in the south has actually changed anything at the level of someone
[Amit Varma]: in government paying attention and doing something about it everything for
[Guest]: example if there's a flood coverage right and there is continuous coverage
[Guest]: of a flood on a national TV channel the point is someone sitting in Delhi is
[Guest]: going to think okay at least for perception basis we have to give this
[Guest]: we had ensure that this many NDRF people or boats are given they would do it
[Guest]: otherwise also but they may do a little bit more because there is sustained
[Guest]: coverage right for example when the Sri Lankan war was going on at that time
[Guest]: there was a lot of focus on the Sri Lankan war and what the Tamil parties
[Guest]: were saying and a lot of things which happened in that process were reactions
[Guest]: from the government and if M Karunanidhi sitting on Marina Beach and
[Guest]: doing that whole whatever half-day protest that he did was not covered a
[Guest]: lot by all the national channels the government can still try to turn a blind
[Guest]: eye but all cameras are focused on him right other than the fact that he is
[Guest]: sitting there that is important the fact that the media coverage is adding to it
[Guest]: so you know in many ways Delhi channels covering a certain thing adds value to
[Guest]: it I'm not talking about Indian Express or the Hindustan Times or newspapers at
[Guest]: all they do their job much more properly they go to the people
[Guest]: they tell their stories TV channels have stopped doing that long back so I'm not
[Guest]: looking at them in that way at all to tell the story of the person I am only
[Guest]: looking at utility if a story is told will the government react to it if they
[Guest]: carry the story for example there is a ship which has been captured by the
[Guest]: Houthi rebels in Yemen there are seven Indians on it we don't even know who the
[Guest]: seventh Indian is we know about six Indians newspapers have written about it
[Guest]: we have written about it we have written a very detailed copy on how there is
[Guest]: absolutely no word and this is a problem between Saudi Arabia and the rebels and
[Guest]: Indians are just caught in between because it was Saudi Arabian ship which
[Guest]: apparently had arms and ammunitions which the crew did not know about but
[Guest]: Saudi saying he did not have arms and ammunition it was only a hospital
[Guest]: equipment and the rebels have planted the arms and ammunition we don't know
[Guest]: who's saying the truth that it's Saudi or the rebels my simple point amid this
[Guest]: today let's say if a national channel like Times Now decides to take it up and
[Guest]: three days there on a campaign saying let's do something for the Indians who
[Guest]: are who are caught by these rebels the government may do something just for
[Guest]: eyeballs but it's fine they will do they can force them to do they have the
[Guest]: capability to do it they stop telling people stories long ago that is their
[Guest]: problem but if they do they can make the government listen
[Amit Varma]: yeah and one of the things that points to what you're saying is that then
[Amit Varma]: governance is seriously broken if for government to act on a matter that is
[Amit Varma]: important you actually need the media to bring it to their attention and all
[Amit Varma]: these extraneous sort of considerations to begin to matter my next question is
[Amit Varma]: that you know I keep meeting people who keep praising the work that people like
[Amit Varma]: you do or scroll do or news laundry does and so on and so forth right I have felt
[Amit Varma]: and obviously I would be biased because I would be meeting to be you know
[Amit Varma]: listening to people who would share similar values to mine but I have felt
[Amit Varma]: and in the evolution of my podcast I have certainly felt there are people who
[Amit Varma]: crave depth there are people who definitely would crave the kind of
[Amit Varma]: reportage that you do and there isn't enough of it out there my good friend
[Amit Varma]: Prem Panicker once described what the media does as going a mile wide and an
[Amit Varma]: inch deep and maybe they have to because of the imperatives of the day whether it
[Amit Varma]: is you know they've paid huge license fees and they're too dependent on
[Amit Varma]: advertising so you go for the lowest common denominator and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth and therefore people crave depth I see this with the five-hour
[Amit Varma]: conversations I have for example where typically five years ago I would have
[Amit Varma]: assumed no one has five hours everybody has a short retention span blah blah
[Amit Varma]: blah but no the engagement is off the charts similarly I see the love that
[Amit Varma]: people have for the kind of work that you guys do and by you guys I mean the
[Amit Varma]: News Minute and the handful of others and we hardly need to name them so my
[Amit Varma]: question is that what sense do you get of the hunger that there is because what
[Amit Varma]: I have seen happening in the creator economy worldwide over the last in a
[Amit Varma]: sense I'll include you in the creator economy and if you want me to double
[Amit Varma]: click on that I can but I'd include you in that and what I've seen happening
[Amit Varma]: over the last decade or so in the creator economy is that there is a lag
[Amit Varma]: between the hunger and the monetization of that but that lag is always sooner or
[Amit Varma]: later covered so there might be you know that there was this phase where creators
[Amit Varma]: began to connect directly with audiences but couldn't monetize it yet so you'd
[Amit Varma]: have to go through you know via means like advertisers or sponsors but then
[Amit Varma]: there came a moment where they actually began to monetize it and it actually
[Amit Varma]: kind of began to make sense like I recorded with Akar Patel two or three
[Amit Varma]: days ago though that episode might come out after this and he was talking about
[Amit Varma]: how back in the day in some of the places that he worked big media house
[Amit Varma]: would have three four hundred or thousand I forget what it is but it's a
[Amit Varma]: big number reporters in each state right and his point was that if you look at
[Amit Varma]: the financial models today it's not feasible for you know anyone to actually
[Amit Varma]: put money into that kind of reportage and that would certainly apply more to
[Amit Varma]: you know young startups like all of you so what is your sense of that hunger
[Amit Varma]: like at some point you know how the future will evolve we don't know it's
[Amit Varma]: unknown unknowns but what is that sense of that hunger and the appreciation that
[Amit Varma]: you get because my sense is that your absolute numbers may not be mind
[Amit Varma]: blowingly massive but of the numbers that you do have the engagement would be
[Amit Varma]: far greater the loyalty would be far greater that personal connect would be
[Amit Varma]: far greater I mean that's another thing I noticed I was you know looking at your
[Amit Varma]: Instagram and I think one of the things that really works for you like when you
[Amit Varma]: put up that eight image thing on the income tax rates and all that and there
[Amit Varma]: is that sense of for everyone who reads your site there is that sense of
[Amit Varma]: personal engagement that these people are part of my sort of part of my world
[Amit Varma]: these are my people they're doing it for me whereas with mainstream media with
[Amit Varma]: big media it's just a complete disconnect you know even people even
[Amit Varma]: fans of or not as you pronounce that in such a charming way or not even you know
[Amit Varma]: fans of or not who might support him and you know they'll do jingoism with him
[Amit Varma]: won't feel that personal connect with him that if he sneezes one day they'll
[Guest]: be like shit does he have a cold yeah I'm just thinking of on up sneezing and
[Guest]: having a cold but see I think this is a dilemma I face right first what you said
[Guest]: um the financial models the revenue models we have been around for eight years so
[Guest]: have news on news on has been around for ten years it's the I think longest
[Guest]: running site but it was started by someone like Madhu Trehan who and Abhinandan
[Guest]: who both have had experience running something it's not like me I was just a
[Guest]: mid-level mid-career journalist who did not want back to go back to TV that's it
[Guest]: so all of us are figuring out our revenue models I think for example the
[Guest]: wire or the alt news which are not non-profit they they have better revenue
[Guest]: models because people can donate to them and the news laundry for example is a
[Guest]: very loyal set of readers who contribute we are a little bit different because we
[Guest]: also cover news therefore to make people pay for it is very difficult I mean
[Guest]: whenever I keep putting saying key you know join become a member I feel a lot
[Guest]: of people believe that immediately some hundreds of people are joining in
[Guest]: thousands of people are members it's not true it's very difficult to move
[Guest]: membership forward it happens when there is a big story you get like 40 50 people
[Guest]: signing in but otherwise people are not like thinking back and deciding I want
[Guest]: to just give thousand two hundred rupees the news minute today they don't because
[Guest]: they think this news is free why should I pay for it the problem is if I stop
[Guest]: the news minute tomorrow if news laundry is no longer there if the queen stops
[Guest]: are you going to feel that void there as a news consumer do you think the news
[Guest]: minute is important in your city in your state to tell those stories and you
[Guest]: should think of a scenario where the news minute is not there and if it
[Guest]: continues like this a news minute may not actually be there so which is why
[Guest]: the readers have to step in now that's the model which all of us are working
[Guest]: with where the reader feels the necessity and reader fee supports the
[Guest]: organization but that is also scalable only to a certain extent right it cannot
[Guest]: it's not scalable to an extent where from a 40% organization I can become 80
[Guest]: and I can have reporters in all two tier cities I can have investigating report
[Guest]: investigative reporter somebody looks only at quotes etc beats these are all
[Guest]: sacrifices we make we don't have beat reporters we don't reporters in second
[Guest]: tier cities because we don't have the strength for it right so can readers
[Guest]: paying bridge that gap it cannot so then what have we all realized that look we
[Guest]: can only make this much money with that we can simply support our organization
[Guest]: let's just be very powerful in the stories we write but I fear that in the
[Guest]: last two or three years though we all have become better in storytelling we
[Guest]: are telling very important stories we're still catering to the same crowd again
[Guest]: and again now there are two reasons why one we are all English websites we are
[Guest]: writing in English our videos are in English it is catering to the same crowd
[Guest]: now of course wire and others have Hindi so they reach out to another crowd but
[Guest]: for a South Indian here we are a very English website right so one you have to
[Guest]: start in languages now if the all the websites I talked about are liberal
[Guest]: progressive they have a certain take on issues they've talked for environment
[Guest]: for climate change etc they passionately believe in different different things in
[Guest]: democracy but if you really want to make a change one you have to scale by scale
[Guest]: I mean you don't have to do many different things I don't want to become
[Guest]: an NDTV where recipes are there you know something happened in Japan some girl
[Guest]: sang beautifully that story is also there in China somebody fell in a
[Guest]: pothole that story is also there plus I because that's just traffic I never want
[Guest]: to be like that even if I have a lot of money I don't want to be like that I
[Guest]: want to be the news minute if I have two reporters now I want to have six
[Guest]: reporters in a state but I also want to scale in the sense that I want to reach
[Guest]: more audiences now the problem in digital is also that you have to invest a
[Guest]: little bit of money to even reach people you have to invest new SEO at one point
[Guest]: of time all of us were spending so much money on Facebook thankfully that has
[Guest]: stopped I mean imagine on Facebook for your post to be read you have to boost
[Guest]: it otherwise Facebook will not shown that algorithm now we are like screw
[Guest]: this we are not going to do this we don't want people to read like that if
[Guest]: it is organically doing well it can but I can tell you Amit the number of
[Guest]: stories which should be read by 3 lakh 4 lakh 5 lakh people because of the fact
[Guest]: is important it's only read by 10,000 people why because Google algorithm has
[Guest]: something called showcase now where they have signed contracts with all these big
[Guest]: media houses in India and Facebook literally does not show anything on
[Guest]: their algorithm the small sites are suffering more and more so we are
[Guest]: actually becoming smaller and smaller when it comes to our readership right
[Guest]: because none of us will write about somebody's divorce and what is happening
[Guest]: in that or we will not stoop to writing about like what the Times of India does
[Guest]: five bikinis somebody wore in the beach we are not doing that we are not scaling
[Guest]: in that way at all but technology is stopping us to one extent money is
[Guest]: stopping us to the other to another extent so what I want in my vision is
[Guest]: money either from the readers or you know there are people who have money in
[Guest]: India who realize that we need a vibrant democracy we have to invest in media or
[Guest]: ten years later we can twiddle our thumbs and say oh my god we didn't do
[Guest]: anything about it so either they put in money in the media and we have to break
[Guest]: away from this English dominance here we have to start in languages all this
[Guest]: entire exercise means nothing if you are going to be only catering to the
[Guest]: English reading audiences you are not touching the pulse of India if so for me
[Guest]: as an entrepreneur I mean I classify myself as an entrepreneur only in very
[Guest]: few conversations I'm classifying myself for this answer I feel all of us have to
[Guest]: become scalable I do know that when we discuss business plans everybody in my
[Guest]: office and others tell me it's okay you need to have loyal readers I want loyal
[Guest]: readers I'm not saying no but I also want more people to read it because I
[Guest]: think what we write is important and for that scalability unfortunately you need
[Guest]: either money or you just need algorithms to work for you right and third thing
[Guest]: is languages which is my dream forever but it's never been happening. So I want
[Amit Varma]: to double click on each of these big themes and and the first one is that you
[Amit Varma]: you know what essentially saying is that sure there might be people who have the
[Amit Varma]: hunger for such news and sure they might even be willing to pay for it but how do
[Amit Varma]: we reach them and and the constraint is their money how do we scale and there
[Amit Varma]: also I feel like that there is a natural dilemma there is a trade-off because the
[Amit Varma]: more you try to scale the more you compromise and the question then comes
[Amit Varma]: is where do you draw the line you can of course just do a thousand stories about
[Amit Varma]: children falling into wells and all kinds of nonsense and get some numbers
[Amit Varma]: but where do you draw the line and I imagine for every news organization like
[Amit Varma]: yours then that where to draw the line the answer to that would come from some
[Amit Varma]: core values or core beliefs that you have some clear idea of yourself that
[Amit Varma]: this is what we are this is why we exist this is what we do we wanted to get to
[Amit Varma]: all the readers who might value this and what are we willing to do to get there
[Amit Varma]: like how does one then reconcile this because you're right that there is no
[Amit Varma]: point staying in a small idealistic space with a handful of reporters where
[Amit Varma]: the good work is not reaching the people who would appreciate the good work and
[Amit Varma]: fund more of it but at the same time what do you have to do to get there I
[Amit Varma]: mean you know that's like you've obviously been living this process for
[Guest]: the last few years if I had figured that out then I will be having news minute in
[Guest]: many languages so technically I've not figured it out but see when I say I want
[Guest]: the things to reach more people it's not only because I want them to become a
[Guest]: loyal reader or I want them to pay for news the hijab row for example I keep
[Guest]: going back to it because that's the most current thing which we are covering
[Guest]: right if you see the kind of coverage in Kannada media especially in Kannada
[Guest]: television you will be appalled the kind of things that say they will put Isis
[Guest]: behind the girls the five girls in the hijab are shown and they will have
[Guest]: headlines saying does Isis have a hand in the hijab row like what proof do you
[Guest]: have to say any of this that is the kind of messaging going to the larger
[Guest]: population the news minute is read by let's say one story we do like we had
[Guest]: this fantastic story by my colleague Prajwal and then my another colleague
[Guest]: Pooja Prasanna they both wrote about how the saffron shawl protest was not an
[Guest]: organic thing it was very well organized right it was viral for a lot of people
[Guest]: but in absolute numbers maybe 50,000 people who read the story right it was
[Guest]: really viral and Google algorithm had picked up maybe that number would have
[Guest]: gone to one or one and a half lakhs but I'm saying the stories we're saying are
[Guest]: important it doesn't matter if people eventually pay for it oh I don't care
[Guest]: about that but I think to counter the narratives which are being spread by a
[Guest]: lot of toxic mainstream media it is very important that we become scalable but
[Guest]: unfortunately technology and lack of resource is pulling us down and it is
[Guest]: continuously happening like we have a lot of meetings and discussions I mean I
[Guest]: speak to Abhinandan I speak to a lot of people on a on a weekly basis of
[Guest]: whatever there is no perfect solution to this all of us are becoming more and
[Guest]: more I think we're just like in our own cocoons where okay I have loyal
[Guest]: readers a news minute I will keep catering to them the news laundry is
[Guest]: loved by this many people I will grow that number slowly but I'm not thinking
[Guest]: like that I'm saying more people should read the news laundry more people should
[Guest]: know the news minute or the wire it should not be the same people right
[Guest]: because there are people out there who are ready to read new viewpoints accept
[Guest]: new viewpoints and understand the world better see I don't want to classify
[Guest]: everybody is black and white saying or you know you're a sanghi or a non sanghi
[Guest]: or this you're that no there are a lot of people who don't actually have a good
[Guest]: idea of what's happening and if they are told that look Isis is not behind the
[Guest]: hijab bro there is nothing like that there's no proof the Kannada channels
[Guest]: are lying to you if somebody tells them that they're the intelligence to accept
[Guest]: that argument but we are not reaching them because we don't have the resources
[Guest]: to reach them all the algorithms goes with us so what is my solution my
[Guest]: solution is scaling up in different ways I don't know see I tell everyone to for
[Guest]: example I know that for example all news ask for donations wire ask for donations
[Guest]: news laundry says subscribe we say become member I I'm telling all those
[Guest]: readers think of a world where this organization does not exist would that
[Guest]: impact you then you decide if you want to give money to the organization close
[Guest]: your eyes for two seconds and like you somebody tells you right do you really
[Guest]: want his girlfriend do you will do can you imagine a life with this boyfriend
[Guest]: so same way close your eyes and think for a moment do I want a scenario in the
[Guest]: media where the news minute is not there or where news laundries Manisha's
[Guest]: nuisance shows not there would that be a huge void for you if you feel so then
[Guest]: support that organization that's the only way that we have figured out now
[Guest]: but I'm really hoping that there will be some change unfortunately the nature of
[Guest]: the medium is such that you know in TV you can have a great distributor like
[Guest]: Sun for example in Tamil Nadu used to control distribution at one point of
[Guest]: time like nobody would write a story against nobody would do a story against
[Guest]: the Marans because they would be cut off on television at long back I'm not
[Guest]: talking about now I this is a myth I don't know they've actually cut channels
[Guest]: they have at times but it's not in a large scale but you can still build a
[Guest]: very powerful distribution system your channel may suck it may have the worst
[Guest]: of content you your newspaper has practically no story but if you have
[Guest]: good distribution system you can still ensure that it reaches people whether
[Guest]: they buy the product a newspaper has to be bought right with the TV channel
[Guest]: that's not a problem but unfortunately digital doesn't work like that our
[Guest]: distribution is through Google is through Facebook and little bit of
[Guest]: organic stuff through people who will come or want to read a certain thing so
[Guest]: when we are so dependent on those people I mean we are all trying not to be
[Guest]: dependent anymore but I feel like we are going to come full circle again where we
[Guest]: realize that we are dependent on them if you want to speak to a larger number of
[Guest]: people if you want to reach a larger crowd in India bigger population but
[Guest]: unfortunately those companies I mean it's not their responsibility right to
[Guest]: ensure that we are read by a lot of people it's not there it's not a burden
[Guest]: and they're not bothered about it therefore video is another way out
[Amit Varma]: yeah I mean I'll just write video down because that's another thing we'll then
[Amit Varma]: double click on a little later few thoughts one I love those stories by
[Amit Varma]: Prajwal and Pooja on the hijab controversy and even the discussion I
[Amit Varma]: think you had with them on Twitter live or whatever that is my way of thinking
[Amit Varma]: about the glass half full you know you painted a very dismal picture and my
[Amit Varma]: glass half full look at it would be that sure maybe your absolute numbers are not
[Amit Varma]: as much as all of those people who are asking is ISIS behind these girls and
[Amit Varma]: all of that but the point is that that kind of news I think is spread very thin
[Amit Varma]: they might reach a lot of people is spread very thin people probably look at
[Amit Varma]: it as some kind of entertainment sure it is part of that constant brainwashing
[Amit Varma]: and all that but the engagement is not so high whereas I think with the kind of
[Amit Varma]: work that you do and the kind of reporting that your incredible reporters
[Amit Varma]: do that I think that the engagement is deeper it's not so thin as sicker the
[Amit Varma]: engagement is deeper and secondly the other way I would look at it is that yes
[Amit Varma]: and we'll speak of languages later and this is obviously a bug that even I feel
[Amit Varma]: that English-speaking elites would be listening to my show much more but even
[Amit Varma]: then you know the hope is that some of these elites who are consuming this
[Amit Varma]: content because you you know they are self-selected in terms of their people
[Amit Varma]: who engage deeply with the world care about the world you hope they'll be
[Amit Varma]: running the country in 30 years from now you know some 16 year old girl watching
[Amit Varma]: the news minute could be Prime Minister of India in 2050 you know I see the
[Amit Varma]: glass half full in that way that we are all playing the long game also you know
[Amit Varma]: you don't know what will happen tomorrow but we are kind of playing the long game
[Amit Varma]: you know I want to also underscore like that's a beautiful question that if
[Amit Varma]: news minute didn't exist or XYZ didn't exist what would the world be like and
[Amit Varma]: that is a scene component you know there are probably organizations which don't
[Amit Varma]: exist to begin with because a space for them was never created because that
[Amit Varma]: willingness to pay that willingness to actually go out there and do it wasn't
[Amit Varma]: there and what I see in the creator economy in the rest of the world is that
[Amit Varma]: that willingness to pay came after a lag that first the audiences came then the
[Amit Varma]: engagement came and then eventually the engagement converted to a willingness to
[Amit Varma]: pay so perhaps I'm not known for being optimistic so this is unlike me but I
[Amit Varma]: would just hope that you know the kind of early experiments that news laundry
[Amit Varma]: with the subscription you guys with your membership and alt news and where I've
[Amit Varma]: carried out are just the other start that eventually that willingness to pay
[Guest]: will come you know I am a very optimistic person I just answered your
[Guest]: question as to what is the future I am confused but I'm not someone who's
[Guest]: willing to give up or I'm not going to think that this is going to this is
[Guest]: going to make me do less work or anything like that I have vision that it
[Guest]: should reach more people and I'm frustrated that it is not and that's not
[Guest]: just my story it is everybody's story right so therefore how do you engage in
[Guest]: other ways so you have a problem in front of you I am not looking at the
[Guest]: problem as a dead end okay fine I'm not getting enough members I nobody no
[Guest]: billionaire in India thinks it's important to put money into media your
[Guest]: problem man five years later you are under some you know some government is
[Guest]: going to shut your in your company or do something to you don't expect the don't
[Guest]: expect there's going to be a democratic voice out there because you never held
[Guest]: a democratic voice right so I'm very clear about all that now all the
[Guest]: problems are there what is my solution I'm always looking at my solution so my
[Guest]: solution is okay I will focus on certain things and I will ensure that what you
[Guest]: said that those people are very engaged they get depth out of reading the news
[Guest]: minute they understand issues better I make them more educated in the process I
[Guest]: learn myself right I learn I let them learn so that's the way I look at it now
[Guest]: there's no the scalability is in my dream vision but if it doesn't happen it
[Guest]: doesn't matter I continue the same way and then I now think videos are another
[Guest]: way to really reach out people because it's it's a bit more democratic space
[Guest]: than your algorithm of tech stories so we are going to do that more we are
[Guest]: going to be in the video space more in languages how much of our resources help
[Guest]: us we are going to be there so everyone is devising their own base but sometimes
[Guest]: it does get frustrating thinking why is there not suddenly like this boom and
[Guest]: you know we can start more we can experiment more and I'm just flush with
[Guest]: money and I'm like I want to start Malayalam now I don't start a Tamil
[Guest]: channel I mean it is frustrating at times but most of times like I said we
[Guest]: we are keeping on finding solutions and the conversations that all of us have
[Guest]: started are very very important like for example I remember this story which
[Guest]: scroll did on I think in Jharkhand there were some so many thousands of sedition
[Guest]: cases against people these are very important stories right nobody else
[Guest]: would tell those stories and it doesn't matter even if 50,000 people don't read
[Guest]: it there are some stories which are for posterity it is there because it has to
[Guest]: be there I have no doubts about that but I also feel when a news event is
[Guest]: happening and people are being brainwashed think in a certain way that
[Guest]: other narrative also has to reach a lot more people which is my only frustration
[Guest]: I am NOT saying that every story has to be read by one lakh people two lakh
[Guest]: people ten lakh people no I I don't in my thoughts if that never comes I mean I
[Guest]: don't even give my analytics to my staff members they don't know who's reading
[Guest]: what but sometimes I feel that I wish we had more yeah I totally get that let's
[Amit Varma]: talk about languages in video and let's kind of talk about languages first and
[Amit Varma]: what I want to ask you and this is something I have no idea of at all so
[Amit Varma]: what I want to ask you is what is the existing ecosystem for language
[Amit Varma]: journalism in India because I would imagine that if there is already some
[Amit Varma]: kind of rich ecosystem rich perhaps not in terms of quality of content but just
[Amit Varma]: numbers of people reporting in the languages then from that independent
[Amit Varma]: voices might emerge like the same way you got this illusion with times now and
[Amit Varma]: ended up setting up news minute somebody in some big language mainstream media
[Amit Varma]: house might say that hey let me start something I'll go on YouTube and do
[Amit Varma]: something or I'll start a whatsapp news service or whatever but is that
[Guest]: ecosystem there to begin with no unfortunately no it is very less
[Guest]: limited to certain states like for example Kerala has some of the more
[Guest]: vibrant sites they have dual news South live not the South lab no dual news the
[Guest]: queue true copy South lab because it keeps coming and going
[Guest]: I remove them there quite a few but is a reach that great no and I know that most
[Guest]: of them are really struggling but they also have a vision that they want to be
[Guest]: progressive they want to speak a certain language so they're there they're
[Guest]: fighting it out every day but that's not the same in Tamil or Telugu or Kannada in
[Guest]: fact I was an event a few days ago where Jayarani she's one of the most
[Guest]: vocal most passionate woman journalist in Tamil Nadu who has been around for a
[Guest]: long time and she was saying that there is no progressive space in Tamil Nadu no
[Guest]: progressive media in Tamil Nadu where she can actually write and half her stuff
[Guest]: gets translated and it's on the wire or sometimes in the news minute she's saying
[Guest]: where is the progressive space now see when we talk about news media and
[Guest]: coverage we should not restrict only to politics right let's say about women
[Guest]: about the me too moment or you know how women and children are treated etc most
[Guest]: of the language media do not have a progressive stance but there are people
[Guest]: working in those media organizations who do have it and if they were given the
[Guest]: resources to start something new they can make people in that state think
[Guest]: otherwise right for example if we talk about the me too moment itself half the
[Guest]: media kept away from it because they have too many skeletons in their own
[Guest]: closet that's one men don't want reporting on me too okay fine now when
[Guest]: there were instances of me too in Tamil Nadu for example most of the media kept
[Guest]: away from it because they don't have they don't believe in it at all they
[Guest]: don't have a progressive stance at all at the same time if we had Tamil
[Guest]: independent media we would have had voices right and unfortunately even on
[Guest]: YouTube the people are more popular now are patriarchal people horrible people
[Guest]: lot of them there are very few people who make sense who are progressive who
[Guest]: are you know democratic etc and some of them are becoming huger on YouTube but
[Guest]: the larger population of people who are patriarchal there's no doubt about it so
[Guest]: in languages especially we need to bridge that gap now thankfully one good
[Guest]: thing is Kerala and Tamil Nadu the TV and newspaper media is vibrant they are
[Guest]: not as you cannot compare them to your English channels no way they have they
[Guest]: do better stories they do better journalism no doubt about it so so also
[Guest]: people don't feel that need for independent media as such but I still
[Guest]: think there is I still think that they take very problematic stance on certain
[Guest]: issues especially when it comes to women so I feel at least feminist spaces in
[Guest]: these languages are needed Telugu and Kannada is like a black hole
[Guest]: newspapers still are better but TV channels are I mean you should sit and watch
[Guest]: then you will understand what I'm trying to say there's literally no good work
[Guest]: coming out and they're they are fantastic journalists and they're
[Guest]: fantastic stories to tell but it's not coming out so I don't understand even
[Guest]: people are ready to put money into news channels but why don't they want quality
[Guest]: then like I we did a story a few years ago where I think there were 70 news
[Guest]: channels in Telugu that's the number it may have decreased or increased now I
[Guest]: don't know so there are there are 70 different people who are ready to give
[Guest]: money to these news channels why does at least one person not think I want
[Guest]: quality that's my problem so the language scene definitely needs to
[Guest]: become better because it also it also shapes society right it helps shape
[Guest]: society to a large extent so people in those mainstream media organizations who
[Guest]: feel strongly about something who are progressive voices I wish they had
[Amit Varma]: platforms so I'm going to come back to languages but I'm going to digress
[Amit Varma]: briefly because you spoke of the patriarchy and how women's stories are
[Amit Varma]: looked at and so on and we are of course in a studio now where the AC is off we
[Amit Varma]: should affect me more than it hurts you because you know the tip that the reason
[Amit Varma]: that in our offices you know men are often okay with whatever the AC
[Amit Varma]: temperature is but women are feeling cold more is that these standards for
[Amit Varma]: what the temperature should be of air conditioning were designed in the 50s
[Amit Varma]: and 60s where offices were inhabited by men so they were designed for men and
[Amit Varma]: women's bodies respond differently and if you know they feel colder at a
[Amit Varma]: different temperature and therefore you will have the tendency that men are
[Amit Varma]: completely chilling and even making the AC cooler and women are shivering and
[Amit Varma]: putting shawl and all of that and for me I find that a good metaphor for thinking
[Amit Varma]: about how it's a world designed for men by men so my question here is that when
[Amit Varma]: it comes to journalism and I am asking a question about the entire span of your
[Amit Varma]: journalistic career where you worked with a lot of women obviously they're
[Amit Varma]: visible but do women exist in the sense that is everything just the male gaze is
[Amit Varma]: everything focused around the issues that men care about and does everything
[Amit Varma]: then go along those lines like you've already spoken of the frustration that
[Amit Varma]: you had where you know your Delhi based channels are not taking South issues
[Amit Varma]: seriously but is it also just a pan-India issue when no one looks at it
[Amit Varma]: from a woman's gaze everything is a man's gaze and that determines what
[Guest]: stories are done. So because you spoke about the air conditioning I just want
[Guest]: to say something that when I worked in times now it used to be really cold in
[Guest]: the office and I used to go complain saying please reduce the temperature I
[Guest]: cannot sit here and they wouldn't they say this is what it is it's a
[Guest]: centralized air condition so I am the kind of person who then stuffed
[Guest]: cardboard panel like cardboard sheets into the AC and I said I'm going to put
[Guest]: it that's it I don't want your AC and I just stuffed cardboard pieces in all air
[Guest]: conditions in my room so I am that kind of a woman if you're not going to give
[Guest]: the temperature for me I will make sure that I get it that's the first thing and
[Guest]: second thing is yes it is completely male gaze I'm not saying the woman is
[Guest]: not there in in media the woman is there but again not all kinds of women it is
[Guest]: still a very upper-class dominated media scene in India that's one and second is
[Guest]: there are a lot of women like if you look at the population of women in a
[Guest]: media organization it could be around 30-40 percent if you take a channel it
[Guest]: will be around 30-40 percent but what are these women doing they are not
[Guest]: decision-makers there are very few few women who are editors very few women who
[Guest]: head beats so therefore it's not just enough that you have women in the news
[Guest]: room that number has gone up and it's very rotating right the newsroom itself
[Guest]: is such a it's so difficult to work I mean even in the news minute I'm not
[Guest]: talking about other organizations but a cycle of news itself is such a hard
[Guest]: thing to follow that people just leave the profession itself they can't take it
[Guest]: anymore and more women leave the profession than men do so eventually you
[Guest]: know promotion promotion the guy who's going up is always the man so there are
[Guest]: women in newsrooms but they're not representative of all women and they're
[Guest]: not reaching the decision-making centers of a newsroom so unless we correct that
[Guest]: it is going to be very difficult like when I started the news minute now when
[Guest]: I started the news minute I had actually no idea how to start a website I did not
[Guest]: even know that there is a cloud space and things are stored there I just
[Guest]: thought Danya Rajendran who has 10 I had 10,000 followers on Twitter then that if
[Guest]: I start that's it every millions and millions will read this is what I
[Guest]: thought clearly that's not true so when I started I had no clue I started news
[Guest]: aggregator imagine because I read somewhere Huffington Post a news
[Guest]: aggregator okay that's fashionable I'll also start one imagine I don't have any
[Guest]: money I've asked my husband for money and I'm starting something taken two
[Guest]: people I had no idea about even me as a woman reporter in times now I realized
[Guest]: that so much of my reporting was through a male gaze because my editor told me to
[Guest]: report in a certain way and it is when I came to the news minute that I started
[Guest]: thinking why am I doing the same thing again and again one turning point for me
[Guest]: was in 2016 where it's a very small story but there is there is very popular
[Guest]: actor called Manju warrior in Malayalam and her husband is Dilip they are this
[Guest]: one big couple right and they get divorced and there is a lot of chatter
[Guest]: because the child decides to go with the father and it's a girl child opts to go
[Guest]: with the father not with the mother why oh my god she must be a bad mother
[Guest]: horrible mother and even today people discuss that a lot why did the mother
[Guest]: not get the child why did the child go with the father so I I thought big deal
[Guest]: everybody doesn't have to be a great mother if given an option my son would
[Guest]: never come with me he'll go with my husband I like him I love him but the
[Guest]: fact is I'm not a great mother that's not my primary job I feel and I suck at
[Guest]: it most times so he has a choice right but why should I be judged on it I am
[Guest]: very good at something else so we wrote a story saying not everybody needs to be
[Guest]: a mother first or not a child can connect to a father more than a mother
[Guest]: there's no rule written that it has to be the mother who's the most important
[Guest]: person that child's life when we wrote that story a lot of people were taken
[Guest]: aback my colleague Sowmya Rajendran wrote it I don't remember if she was she
[Guest]: was not a newsman she was a freelancer so I contacted her and told her can you
[Guest]: write in this angle and she agreed with me and it became very viral a lot of
[Guest]: people shared it and I realized that we are not telling stories from a woman's
[Guest]: perspective why why should every story be about questioning Manju Aryan why
[Guest]: can't we just say what is wrong let the child go where the child feels happy
[Guest]: right so from then on for me in the news minute journey from that story I decided
[Guest]: that if I want to look at a story I am NOT going to think like Danya in times
[Guest]: now I'm going to think differently I mean I've had many learning lessons when
[Guest]: in times now itself there was a story I covered of a rape of a child by her own
[Guest]: father he was what he wasn't he was working with the embassy here he was a
[Guest]: foreign national was a French citizen and we covered the news a lot so in my
[Guest]: mind I'm thinking justice for the child justice for the child right and in my
[Guest]: pursuit for justice I am putting out all sorts of gory stories how she was
[Guest]: violated what was the exact nature of rape etc because I am thinking justice
[Guest]: justice justice then the mother sat me down and said I understand your
[Guest]: intentions but many years later my daughter will read all this on the
[Guest]: internet and your pursuit of justice would have ended by then maybe my
[Guest]: daughter would never get the justice and she didn't get him by the way the father
[Guest]: was acquitted but why would all these details be there on the internet it's
[Guest]: not fair to her so that violent times now it's in my perspective of this
[Guest]: pursuit for justice change that the person who wants justice is the person
[Guest]: who should control the narrative is something which I decided even then and
[Guest]: then this this 2016 story about this Manju warrior also made me realize that
[Guest]: look we need to start telling stories differently we are always saying this
[Guest]: from the male gaze and it starts from even the most local crime story right
[Guest]: you there's another instance I have a I had a colleague called Priyanka
[Guest]: Thirumurthy she used to work in Tamil Nadu Bureau so there was a story about a
[Guest]: man getting killed on the first night and the headline said that the woman
[Guest]: kills the hubby because he's not handsome so I told Priyanka that called
[Guest]: a station and check on the story now why did that person if this the story came
[Guest]: in all the newspapers okay because it is an agency copy why because the reporter
[Guest]: would have called up the station and said what is the FIR the FIR is based on
[Guest]: the complaint given by the man the dead man's family which says he is ugly she
[Guest]: didn't like him so she killed him crime reporter does not put any brain writes
[Guest]: a story I don't Priyanka you called a station I did not give her any any
[Guest]: instructions but she called me back and said ma'am I asked them what did the
[Guest]: woman say and they said that the woman did not want to get married her parents
[Guest]: forced her to get married and in the first night when he tried to have sex
[Guest]: with her she she in a fit of whatever tension rage whatever killed that's her
[Guest]: version which may be true may not be dude but point is Priyanka had that had
[Guest]: that sense to ask what is the woman's version she was not thinking like a
[Guest]: crime reporter and then I realized that when you're a woman reporter in your
[Guest]: newsroom and you have someone who's a Dalit or a Muslim or from the LGBT
[Guest]: community I'm not saying that a woman has to report only on women's issues or
[Guest]: a Dalit person or somebody from the community should report only in the
[Guest]: community but they bring a certain sense to the newsroom which is why if you are
[Guest]: women in all levels of decision-making they bring that change to your
[Guest]: organization and organizations have to invest in this they cannot say that oh
[Guest]: my god inclusivity is not something I can really target because I'd look at
[Guest]: merit you look at merit also but you this has to be in your vision otherwise
[Guest]: your organization will not speak all voices so for me in the beginning it was
[Guest]: only about the feminist viewpoint you know telling a story from not a male
[Guest]: gaze and we put all our energy into it and it really worked I feel like we have
[Guest]: been able to make a lot of changes for example people who watch Tamil movies
[Guest]: they must be knowing that a few years ago every big movie had the hero stalking
[Guest]: the heroine stalking singing stalking singing it has stopped to a large extent
[Guest]: now like an actor like Dhanush half his movies were like that he doesn't act
[Guest]: like that anymore because of the criticism and I'm very happy that as an
[Guest]: ordinary writers like Anna Wettekar where the news minute wrote first about
[Guest]: these things very very powerfully I still remember the wife of one of these
[Guest]: top actors calling me and saying I will watch out for his scripts from now and
[Guest]: today you can see that effort of you know Anna or Sowmya and so many others
[Guest]: continuously writing about it there is a change right in the film industry and
[Guest]: when we wrote that first article it was there was this girl called Swati who was
[Guest]: murdered in the in the in a railway station in Chennai we wrote about the
[Guest]: fact that Tamil movies should not have stalking scenes they'll come with his
[Guest]: Arival which is a sword so we wrote that this kind of valorizing the hero this
[Guest]: toxic masculinity is not correct we face such a backlash one of the biggest most
[Guest]: respected reviewers actually wrote a piece in one of the newspapers saying
[Guest]: that there is no empirical data to prove that people follow what they see in
[Guest]: movies but once we started the trend more and more I mean they were already
[Guest]: writers who are writing this but as an organization nobody was following it
[Guest]: right see you can have a writer in the Times of India one review will look at a
[Guest]: movie in a certain way but we made sure that news minute or any review looks at
[Guest]: the movie in a certain way in a feminist viewpoint and we wrote more and more
[Guest]: about it we were getting thrashed left right and center but we didn't stop and
[Guest]: today I believe that all those people along with us in all those organizations
[Guest]: have really ushered in that change it's not like the film industry woke up one
[Guest]: day and decided I will not write stalking movies it's because society
[Guest]: reacted the media reacted so that way I feel that we need more and more women
[Amit Varma]: and that will definitely bring in more change yeah so I have a couple of
[Amit Varma]: further digressions from this digression so I hope we eventually managed to get
[Guest]: back to where I was going I have been diverting your attention too much right
[Amit Varma]: no because you you're just so full of so much knowledge and great insights that
[Amit Varma]: I'm just like overwhelmed but so we'll take one of those digressions before we
[Amit Varma]: go into the break which is one of the best books I've read in the last decade
[Amit Varma]: is this book by supil Tetlock called super forecasting and one of the
[Amit Varma]: sideways insights in that the book is not about that but one of the sideways
[Amit Varma]: insights in that it was about the study we showed that the best factor in
[Amit Varma]: decision-making when you think about the quality of decision-making the most
[Amit Varma]: important factor is not intelligence or education it is diversity the more
[Amit Varma]: diverse a group of people the better the decision that you will get in fact
[Amit Varma]: therefore I would say that the route to merit is actually through diversity
[Amit Varma]: that's where it comes from and one example of that of course is that you
[Amit Varma]: know the story of the woman who killed her husband that you managed to get
[Amit Varma]: another point of view to deepen the you know and make the readers appreciation
[Amit Varma]: of that story richer because you had a diverse reporter because you had a woman
[Amit Varma]: who could look at it from the woman's point of view and similarly for other
[Amit Varma]: stories you'll have other points of view and other layers which you kind of cut
[Amit Varma]: through and this is something you've also spoken about and I just think that
[Amit Varma]: what editors should do like if I was running an organization my first
[Amit Varma]: principle would always be that if there's a position and there are two
[Amit Varma]: equal candidates you take the one who increases the diversity in whatever way
[Amit Varma]: across whatever margin and this is something you've spoken about as well so
[Amit Varma]: you know how do you think editors should approach this because I think many
[Amit Varma]: editors wouldn't even be aware that this is a problem that we have this you you're
[Amit Varma]: really hiring from the same pool of people everything is homogenous and in a
[Amit Varma]: sense from 30 years ago it would be natural because you'd have your entire
[Amit Varma]: talent pool coming from like st. Stephens in Delhi and Hindu in Delhi if
[Amit Varma]: you're there everybody knows everybody else it's the same pool of people today
[Amit Varma]: that pool of people is everybody I mean not everybody but way more people have
[Amit Varma]: access to technology are exposed to the world have points of view and whatever
[Amit Varma]: so as an editor what would you advise to other editors be how should they
[Guest]: approach this see I am NOT from St. Stephens or the Hindu or any college in
[Guest]: Delhi or Bombay I like I said I studied in government Victoria College in
[Guest]: Palakkad so if I I then bring a different perspective to the newsroom right which
[Guest]: others didn't so that way every person has to be looked at like that I have
[Guest]: vacancy now in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu bureaus and a lot of male reporters are
[Guest]: there who have sent their resumes they are very talented I'm not saying they
[Guest]: are not in fact some of them align with what our organization wants very well
[Guest]: but we already have two male reporter one male reporter Prajwal in Karnataka
[Guest]: and we have Shabbir who's joining us in Tamil Nadu so I'm very clear how much
[Guest]: of a talented the resume from the male reporter is I don't want it now I want a
[Guest]: female reporter there I'm not saying that Prajwal will not be sensitive to a
[Guest]: issue dealing with women but he will not have the viewpoint of a woman right then
[Guest]: my other question is I have to take a woman now in that itself I have to look
[Guest]: at where did they grow up are they going to be same city bred same kind of vision
[Guest]: they have had they come from a village or a two-tier city or whatever and
[Guest]: they'll have a better perspective of things happening in the state what what
[Guest]: is the community or caste or whatever or religion they belong to so these are all
[Guest]: different things now everything cannot be boiled down and you know every time I
[Guest]: cannot make that perfect choice but these are all thoughts going through our
[Guest]: minds right that we want diversity I mean I'm not saying that every person we
[Guest]: hire is to increase diversity in the newsroom or it does not end up like that
[Guest]: because eventually I am also thinking oh my god I have to fill that vacancy I
[Guest]: can't run the bureau with just Prajwal he it's too much work on him I have to
[Guest]: have a second reporter and eventually maybe I will agree to one compromise but
[Guest]: I'm not going to compromise on the fact that it is going to be a woman now which
[Guest]: where is she going to come from what caste is she going to belong to those
[Guest]: are compromise I may eventually make I don't know as of now I'm not recruited
[Guest]: anyone but I am saying as an editor this should be in your thought you are not a
[Guest]: newsroom if you have everybody thinking the same way everyone coming from the
[Guest]: same privilege then there is no perspective I mean you have some decent
[Guest]: progressive perspectives about everything but if you want to report
[Guest]: about a political movement or if you want to report root causes of things
[Guest]: like I have a reporter called Charan Teja he covers Andhra Pradesh and Telangana
[Guest]: the stuff that he writes about OBC movements in Andhra how the BJP is
[Guest]: trying to come into the you know OBC classes can take the votes away make
[Guest]: sure that these smaller OBC organization join that's something that he can see on
[Guest]: the ground on a daily basis and he understands it that my top-down vision
[Guest]: from Bangalore right so it makes a whole lot of difference I'm not saying that it
[Guest]: is possible for all news organizations do it all the time I understand there
[Guest]: are a lot of issues because we sometimes do not get resumes we don't get the
[Guest]: people we like but as much as possible the onus is on each of us to try and if
[Guest]: we don't try then we cannot say you know it's not my business I know I know a
[Guest]: news laundry was trying to do that survey about inclusivity and even how
[Guest]: many women are there in the newsroom a lot of people did not want to talk to
[Guest]: them in fact when they called me for the caste survey they asked like five or six
[Guest]: really bad questions I mean the sense what is your name where do you come from
[Guest]: some random questions they asked those are important ones but generally what I
[Guest]: think about certain in the last question is what is your caste so I said boss
[Guest]: this survey is about caste right I mean it's evident why don't you just ask me
[Guest]: after the first three questions so he said no if I ask it first a lot of
[Guest]: people don't want to reply so I want to warm them up and then I go to the last
[Guest]: question that is how problematic it is people don't want to talk about their
[Guest]: privilege and within the newsroom they don't want to change it now I don't have
[Guest]: a perfect solution or I have changed the newsroom that dramatically I also wish
[Guest]: to do more and in a newsroom of 40 people it's more difficult to do but if
[Guest]: you are in a larger newsroom I think you do have the bandwidth to do it so if
[Guest]: more editors think that way then we will see change no doubt I mean imagine if
[Guest]: Times of India had all women editors for their website at some point of time
[Guest]: somebody is going to say right stop these nonsensical clickbait articles
[Guest]: which you have it is just degrading women I'm sure there will be some editor
[Amit Varma]: who will say that and if she had three others support her. I know for a fact there are
[Amit Varma]: women editors in the Times of India who have said that. No said that
[Guest]: meaning they should be in a position to stop it that's what I'm saying it's not
[Guest]: only about saying their opinion but they have the powers to actually stop it and
[Guest]: give alternatives I'm going to write more serious stuff even if you write
[Guest]: five holiday destinations fine I'll fill my site with that or five recipes to
[Guest]: make dumb biryani that's fine but someone should say and they should be
[Amit Varma]: listened to. I have one recipe to make dumb biryani and that is to open the
[Amit Varma]: Swiggy app on my phone yeah I don't cook at all so yeah and and the other thing
[Amit Varma]: that you kind of forgot is that you know as an editor what you do not want it's
[Amit Varma]: somebody to do to you what you did to your friend Audnab when he asked you if
[Amit Varma]: you knew Tamil so that's let's go in for a quick commercial break now and on the
[Amit Varma]: other side of the break we'll continue talking for a few hours more
[Amit Varma]: long before I was a podcaster I was a writer in fact chances are that many of
[Amit Varma]: you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut which was active between
[Amit Varma]: 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time I love the freedom
[Amit Varma]: the form gave me and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways I exercise my writing
[Amit Varma]: muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things because I
[Amit Varma]: wrote about many different things well that phase in my life ended for various
[Amit Varma]: reasons and now it is time to revive it only now I'm doing it through a
[Amit Varma]: newsletter I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy I'll write
[Amit Varma]: about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else so please to
[Amit Varma]: head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe it is free once you sign
[Amit Varma]: up each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox you
[Amit Varma]: don't need to go anywhere so subscribe now for free the India Uncut newsletter
[Amit Varma]: at indiancut.substack.com thank you
[Amit Varma]: welcome back to the scene in the unseen I'm chatting with Dhanya Rajendran on
[Amit Varma]: her fascinating journey so far and the Indian news media and so on and so forth
[Amit Varma]: and going back to the question of language I mean the the other thing that
[Amit Varma]: I often think about is that yes you know when you speak of the English speaking
[Amit Varma]: people of this country people like us that the the kind of media coverage that
[Amit Varma]: we see in the kind of reporting that we get from mainstream media is indeed
[Amit Varma]: abysmal but I think the problem of people in the languages is far far
[Amit Varma]: greater because they simply don't have that much in terms of diversity of views
[Amit Varma]: and information and knowledge available to them and I sense that there is
[Amit Varma]: therefore a greater kind of hunger from it and now I'm much further away from
[Amit Varma]: that than you are I got a sense of it when tik-tok exploded I love tik-tok I
[Amit Varma]: just went perhaps too deeply into it I even designed a course on a tik-tok an
[Amit Varma]: Indian society taught it for a month but at the start of that month these
[Amit Varma]: buggers banned tik-tok because hey I'm so macho I'm gonna teach China a lesson
[Amit Varma]: so that unfortunately went I see glimpses of that on YouTube where in
[Amit Varma]: random corners beautiful things are happening in whatever languages I kind
[Amit Varma]: of understand a little bit give me your sense of that hunger and this is a
[Amit Varma]: different kind of hunger you know the English-speaking guys hunger is give me
[Amit Varma]: depth everything is shallow blah blah blah but she would have access to
[Amit Varma]: everything else from the world she can go to NYT and whatever and the whole
[Amit Varma]: world is kind of out there for the language speakers that's not quite the
[Amit Varma]: case and it would feel that one while it would be richer in a certain way in
[Amit Varma]: terms of local detail and color and on that it would also be malnourished in
[Amit Varma]: other ways in terms of what's happening in the world viewpoints and so on coming
[Amit Varma]: in so what is your sense of not now you like earlier when I asked you about the
[Amit Varma]: language journalism ecosystem I really meant from the providers point of view
[Amit Varma]: where you laid it all out really well but now I'm saying from the audience
[Guest]: point of view what is it like so one thing I feel maybe the people who
[Guest]: consume news and views and languages don't even know that there is a
[Guest]: diversity of views out there they're perhaps not even aware of it because in
[Guest]: their languages it is simply non-existent so it is slowly mushrooming
[Guest]: in YouTube where I see a lot of people for example I follow Malayalam and
[Guest]: Tamil more than the other languages there are these two youtubers I can
[Guest]: immediately think of they call Malu enlist it's a guy and there's a woman
[Guest]: called Gayathri they only they speak mainly on feminism which is whether it
[Guest]: can be a news break it can be about a movie but the fact is they have slowly
[Guest]: built an audience who are more and more hungry to know the other perspective
[Guest]: like you see a Mohanlal or Mammootty movie and you're not allowed to question
[Guest]: the toxicity in it till now nobody has done it but here are people who are
[Guest]: ready to do it and they are not looking for an interview with Mohanlal or Mammootty
[Guest]: or the Axis nothing they are here they have an opinion and I realized that more
[Guest]: and more people are consuming them because they also want to form opinions
[Guest]: they want to look at things differently so that space is definitely there in all
[Guest]: languages but sadly people are not even aware a lot of people are not even
[Guest]: aware of the options because they're so used to consuming news in a certain way
[Guest]: they're so used to certain you know certain opinions that they don't know
[Guest]: the other one exists at all so if we were to give those options to them they
[Guest]: will look at things very differently right even daily day-to-day things
[Guest]: unfolding in front of them they will look at it very differently so that
[Guest]: option I'm I'm sure people are very hungry for and I see it often like for
[Guest]: example when this Bishop Franco case came the judgment came I'm not an
[Guest]: Instagram person at all I mean I've never been on Instagram much sometimes I
[Guest]: put photographs my son and I had a huge meltdown once and he wanted me to delete
[Guest]: every single picture of his so that's it my Instagram is very limited to a few
[Guest]: pictures but that day I was so agitated when this Bishop Franco verdict came
[Guest]: and I randomly went on Instagram in real life in Malayalam that too and Malayalam
[Guest]: English combined and by the end of the day it had almost like seven eight lakh
[Guest]: views right and then I realized that's because people are hungry for different
[Guest]: viewpoints and they don't even know me most of those people because I'm very
[Guest]: new to that platform and they were watching it they thought okay I made
[Guest]: sense then I started getting emails I started getting messages people asking
[Guest]: me how do you perceive this how do you perceive that then I realized that okay
[Guest]: that's a platform with younger people and they are really looking out for more
[Guest]: ways to look at one event than you know just what has been already told to them
[Guest]: space is definitely there people are very hungry people want to understand
[Guest]: things but I don't think we have enough talent out there we have enough
[Guest]: resources out there to pull it to make use of this and I hope it changes that
[Amit Varma]: scenario changes in some time. Yeah I mean one one hope is that at least for
[Amit Varma]: individual creators to go out there and you know maybe reporting requires you
[Amit Varma]: know much more in terms of funds but for an individual person to go out there and
[Amit Varma]: at least share alternative viewpoints is like way easier today. It is but but
[Guest]: there is another weightage to it when it comes from an organization right I mean
[Guest]: an individual like for example a Gayatri or a Manlu analyst I said makes a lot of
[Guest]: impact because they speak about feminism they are against patriarchy they
[Guest]: question politicians actors whoever it is but if they were also representing a
[Guest]: system like an Asianet or a Manorama which has a certain weightage in society
[Guest]: and and then the audience realizes that this is the viewpoint coming in from
[Guest]: that organization also then I think I think it will be taken more seriously
[Guest]: and it obviously just a lot more people so I wish organizations also paid
[Guest]: attention to the fact that it's you know we have to move out of this rut of just
[Guest]: putting out news there one by one by one by one and not pausing to understand
[Guest]: what is the impact of this news how should I look at it how should people
[Guest]: look at it what do I learn from it these are questions you need to ask right so I
[Guest]: wish that that language space was used better. You were speaking about the role
[Amit Varma]: of video earlier so you know and that's something that I've been thinking about
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that you know many of us who create in whatever way we do like
[Amit Varma]: I've all my life thought of myself as a writer and right now I'm not writing we
[Amit Varma]: are talking right and I will at some point do things on YouTube as well and
[Amit Varma]: one of the things when I teach my writing course on my podcasting course
[Amit Varma]: one of the things I keep kind of emphasizing on is that don't think of
[Amit Varma]: yourself as tied down to this one thing that I write or I do this or I do that
[Amit Varma]: you know you have things you want to express and you can express them in
[Amit Varma]: multiple ways you can use your imagination in multiple ways and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth and I and at some level even how we think of the media is
[Amit Varma]: something that you know I've realized that we need to re-examine because you
[Amit Varma]: know earlier you'll think that oh okay I'm maybe I'm a print journalist or
[Amit Varma]: maybe I'm a TV journalist or whatever but there is one form and I box myself
[Amit Varma]: into that but the truth is you know as people like you know in the digital
[Amit Varma]: media that there are various ways to reach the reader the listener you know
[Amit Varma]: the person out there who wants what you're giving and like I looked at your
[Amit Varma]: Instagram and I quite liked it you know you might say you're not very active
[Amit Varma]: there but I kind of liked it you're putting up snippets sometimes you put up
[Amit Varma]: that seven image thing about the tax rate and all that thereby you know
[Amit Varma]: making that personal connect which I'll also ask you about because I think in in
[Amit Varma]: in the new creator economy that also plays a part but in general you know and
[Amit Varma]: and this is clearly something that you've put into practice in different
[Amit Varma]: ways you've thought about that and and you mentioned earlier the importance of
[Amit Varma]: video so take me a little bit through your thoughts on this that you know
[Amit Varma]: there are these particular forms like one of the things that I realized maybe
[Amit Varma]: in just the last few months because I wasn't open to thinking about it in
[Amit Varma]: those ways before that though I should have been because I was a blogger once
[Amit Varma]: is that we used to think 30 years ago in terms of limited forms like if I'm
[Amit Varma]: writing it's an 800 word article or a hundred thousand word book if I'm a
[Amit Varma]: filmmaker it's a 24 minute TV episode or it's a 90 minute Hollywood film 180
[Amit Varma]: minute Bollywood film whatever I guess for a TV person they would also be this
[Amit Varma]: fixed forms that you'll have this three minute segment and the anchor cuts to
[Amit Varma]: you and you take two quotes like that or whatever they'll and the problem with
[Amit Varma]: thinking in those fixed forms the problem with those fixed forms to begin
[Amit Varma]: with is that form determines content so when you think like that you are
[Amit Varma]: constraining what you can do and I think today we've reached a time where those
[Amit Varma]: constraints have to a large extent dissolved and gone away and therefore if
[Amit Varma]: you think in new ways new kinds of content will emerge which equally will
[Amit Varma]: shape the person producing the content the kind of work that you do maybe a
[Amit Varma]: reporter will realize that I don't just have to get two quotes for an 800 word
[Amit Varma]: news piece I can also write a 3,000 word newsletter I can also shoot a video I
[Amit Varma]: can try and go a little deeper in different ways so and you're kind of at
[Amit Varma]: the center of this as a practitioner who's figuring all this out so tell me
[Guest]: a little bit about that. So I always thought of myself as a TV person eight
[Guest]: years in TV I got tired of it and I somehow moved out of the medium but it's
[Guest]: always there in me I want to visual right but I think the first few years of
[Guest]: the news minute I consciously kept visual away from my brain because I
[Guest]: wanted to also try the written word and I did not discourage anyone else from
[Guest]: doing video but slowly I've also realized that TV is indeed a very
[Guest]: powerful medium visual is very powerful sometimes more than the written word and
[Guest]: therefore I cannot discard it I cannot think oh my god I worked eight years in
[Guest]: time so I don't want to do it anymore and the problem is when you run an
[Guest]: organization unfortunately the way you think is what a lot of other people
[Guest]: start thinking like or mimicking so if I don't give importance to the visual
[Guest]: everybody else is going to think the editor-in-chief herself doesn't believe
[Guest]: in visual why should I she doesn't believe in multimedia elements right so
[Guest]: we I think we saw a small downward curve for the news minute in that way for
[Guest]: visual one or two years but now I'm trying to again take it up because I
[Guest]: realize the value of visual and if if a written word is something which is not
[Guest]: scalable like I said right it reaches only 50,000 1 lakh people and the video
[Guest]: has more potential you're anyway ultimately saying the same thing here
[Guest]: and there you're writing the same story in different formats so I want to pay
[Guest]: more attention to video that way because I feel that more younger people people
[Guest]: from various walks of life it's no longer your echo chamber there is a
[Guest]: different process of people consuming videos therefore I think that it's not
[Guest]: just the news minute most news organizations are now tilting towards it
[Guest]: the Quinn for example is one which has used it quite well over the years they've
[Guest]: never left taken their attention off from video the wire I see is doing more
[Guest]: and more news laundries or someone who's always stuck to video right the news
[Guest]: minute is one which wasn't video and then went out so I'm going back for
[Guest]: everyone video is a powerful medium there's no doubt about it and I think
[Guest]: younger people consume video more so if you want to reach out to younger people
[Guest]: I think you have to be in video sound everything and as far as journal people
[Guest]: who are journalists I doubt there are any journalists who now think that I'm
[Guest]: a print journalist I will only write when print journalists go to a place
[Guest]: they are asked to record videos or they asked to take bites so no one can their
[Guest]: vision cannot be narrow anymore I think those days are gone but the problem is
[Guest]: that it's not enough that you envision yourself as a journalist who will go to
[Guest]: the ground and say okay I will also shoot a bite I will also write my story
[Guest]: you need talent in it everybody can shoot a bite but can you construct a
[Guest]: story around it so that is where we are we have a problem we are just letting
[Guest]: everybody shoot videos and put it out and there's no quality at the end of it
[Guest]: which is why organizations now have to take a call that I want quality also I
[Guest]: just don't want quantity I I hope all this works out and we'll have quality
[Guest]: videos we're going to launch a few shows I am very nervous about it because I
[Guest]: don't know if I can do interview shows etc but everybody else says you can you
[Amit Varma]: can so I'm gonna try no you absolutely should I mean you should learn a lesson
[Amit Varma]: from yourself in the sense that what I often tell my writing students is that
[Amit Varma]: there is a trade-off we face between getting it done and getting it right and
[Amit Varma]: I think too many people paralyze themselves because they want to get it
[Amit Varma]: right and they are so obsessed like you know how will I look on camera or you
[Amit Varma]: know who will read me or what is you know and the imposter syndrome kicks in
[Amit Varma]: and all that and my advice always is that no just get it done the only way to
[Amit Varma]: get it right is to get it done again and again you might suck at the start but
[Amit Varma]: you do it again and again and you'll get better and that's exactly what you in
[Amit Varma]: fact kind of did with the News Minute where you know it started like you said
[Amit Varma]: you were aggregating a few things and it was a completely different thing and
[Amit Varma]: then it sort of grew into what it is now something with a genuine vision which is
[Amit Varma]: being driven in a particular way and all of that so tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: that journey that you know firstly why did you leave Times Now because I mean
[Amit Varma]: who would leave Ornab as you pronounce it and then how did you from there how
[Guest]: did the journey to the News Minute happen? So I left Ornab as you say in 2013 on
[Guest]: January 1st I resigned I decided this new year is going to be a beautiful one
[Guest]: Dhanya and I resigned but I had three months notice period so eventually I
[Guest]: worked till March 31st I mean it was it was a decision which is coming I got
[Guest]: tired of TV and I felt TV was not changing it from it was exciting in the
[Guest]: beginning you know to stand on live from 6 o'clock in the morning to 9 o'clock in
[Guest]: the night every time breaking news happens I'm I have abundance of energy I
[Guest]: have no problem with that but I felt we were too agenda driven so much agenda in
[Guest]: stuff and slowly Ornab was pushing that agenda in 2013 he had started it quite
[Guest]: aggressively now even then I did not realize that this is his word against
[Guest]: regional parties against pushing the Congress down with I am seeing it as the
[Guest]: Congress is in power I questioned the government in power at that time BS
[Guest]: Yadurappa was a chief minister here I'm one of the first people who broke the
[Guest]: mining scam report I look at it as questioning the government but I but
[Guest]: slowly I started thinking there is an undercurrent of an agenda and of course
[Guest]: is pushing the South narrative plus the toxicity in the news it was all
[Guest]: different combinations that I left times now I mean they did ask me to stay back
[Guest]: and take a break and come I said no once I'm done I'm done I did get an offer
[Guest]: from another channel I don't want to say who what why but they had an interview
[Guest]: with me and this obnoxious anchor who interviewed me was also the editor he's
[Guest]: like when you come here I know you're Ornab's blue-eyed girl but things will
[Guest]: not work like that in our channel the way Ornab does journalism went on and on
[Guest]: and on I said boss is this my interview or are you wanting to talk about Ornab
[Guest]: can you please decide then I just stopped communication with them I didn't
[Guest]: want to go back to a channel you know the problem of being a workaholic and
[Guest]: then not working is that I am at peace with myself I was actually organizing
[Guest]: birthday parties I like organizing birthday parties I like doing
[Guest]: decoration doing theme parties and I was earning money people were paying me to
[Guest]: organize their kids birthday party so I'm thinking Danya leave journalism you
[Guest]: become a birthday party organizer but people are not happy they are like where
[Guest]: are you joining where are you joining every day my family friends everybody
[Guest]: wants to know what is my next job I told Vignesh my husband I have to do some job
[Guest]: you know people are not gonna leave me so then he said okay go join a channel I
[Guest]: said no I won't do something myself and I said will you give money to start a
[Guest]: website he said but what do you want to start so I said news aggregator I mean I
[Guest]: actually pity him you know he did have some savings I used all of it for like
[Guest]: one and a half years poor man was left not left without any savings but it was
[Guest]: just a random idea to start a news aggregator I had one intern and one
[Guest]: reporter and then I realized that even the one reporting sect thing I was doing
[Guest]: people are reading it I thought let's report more so I told Vignesh give me
[Guest]: some more money then he put a little bit more money and then I hired one reporter
[Guest]: for Kerala one reporter for Andhra Pradesh like that slowly that idea
[Guest]: germinated that let's do more South reporting let's do more female oriented
[Guest]: reporting and I never took money from anyone for the first one and a half
[Guest]: years because I don't have an idea what I'm doing and I can't take somebody
[Guest]: else's money Vignesh was ready to give me money and he knew that that's it that
[Guest]: money is gone but at least he was ready to invest in me I never took anybody's
[Guest]: money for the first one and a half years then they approached me saying we want
[Guest]: to invest by then we had a vision I mean half a vision I would say but if people
[Guest]: had asked me to come to them if I had gone to a venture capitalist and they
[Guest]: had said give me a business plan I have I don't even have one today I'm not
[Guest]: saying everybody should function like that but I am a person like that I did
[Guest]: not have a business plan then it just evolved with time how the news minute
[Guest]: will be maybe five years later the news minute won't even look like this it may
[Guest]: be a completely different organization altogether I don't know I'm not going to
[Guest]: plan that it will evolve by itself but I I'm a risk taker thankfully I had a
[Guest]: husband who was ready to give me money I have a husband who's ready to give me
[Guest]: money when people approach me journalists approach me saying that they
[Guest]: want to start an organization like it's like alarm bells in my mind telling them
[Guest]: no please don't please don't but I don't want to vocalize it but what I want tell
[Guest]: them is that look boss it requires money it requires a vision
[Guest]: Naresh started scroll the same time as me he clearly had a vision I had zilch so
[Guest]: they knew they want to deep reporting they had everything sorted you know I
[Guest]: would look at the scroll and think oh my god I'm actually so clueless and Chitra
[Guest]: Subramaniam was also there with me so she would do her stories but it's okay
[Guest]: we learned right today actually one of my colleagues left the organization it
[Guest]: was last day and we were having his farewell and we were laughing at the
[Guest]: kind of things we have written in the news minute thankfully the first two
[Guest]: years of the site disappeared because we had some technical issue and the site
[Guest]: disappeared if people were to ever go back to that site and take things out oh
[Guest]: my god I'll be trolled forever so in one way yes you have to take risk news
[Guest]: minute was a risk for me but I'm not I'm not attached to the news minute like for
[Guest]: example when Raghav Bell and Ritu Ritu's company Quintolian put money in us and
[Guest]: obviously we had to give them shares right a lot of people advised me saying
[Guest]: that no eventually the company will be gone you will not have any shares what
[Guest]: will I do with the company just shares if I don't have money to run it I don't
[Guest]: know how to run it obviously I need to get investors right so I am NOT
[Guest]: emotionally attached that way to the news minute it is it is a product which
[Guest]: three people started I love doing what the news minute does but five years
[Guest]: later if I have to sell a hundred percent of my shares simply because
[Guest]: investment has to come in I will do it I'm not going to cling on to it thinking
[Guest]: this is my legacy for the next 125 years it's not it has to do the job it has to
[Amit Varma]: do at that period of time that's it. I mean whether you own it or not is it is
[Amit Varma]: your legacy. Two TILs for all my listeners from this one is that you were
[Amit Varma]: Ornab's blue white girl that has now been established and the other TIL is
[Amit Varma]: that the force behind the news minute is Zain Vignesh who funded it in the early
[Amit Varma]: days did do you think that sort of haphazardness so that word has a
[Amit Varma]: negative connotation but that that lack of a plan helped in the sense that you
[Amit Varma]: get in and you're just doing stuff and you evolve and I think there is a
[Amit Varma]: danger in having too much planned out at the start because then you get wedded to
[Amit Varma]: a particular plan and a particular vision of the thing like your plan could
[Amit Varma]: well have been that we will be a aggregator and you could just have stuck
[Amit Varma]: to that and it wouldn't have evolved so do you think that that helps because I
[Amit Varma]: see this as sort of a moment of learning also for me and for anyone who's
[Amit Varma]: listening that you don't always have to have a plan it's sometimes it's
[Amit Varma]: important just to jump in there to trust yourself and to just go with it so you
[Amit Varma]: know what are your sort of thoughts on this having made that journey I actually
[Guest]: don't know I mean I I don't want anyone to follow my example because it's a very
[Guest]: dangerous one see I come from I came from Palakkad I never thought at any
[Guest]: point of time that I will be running an organization small or big right I never
[Guest]: envisaged any future like that for myself I was just someone who didn't want
[Guest]: to go back to shitty TV again and I wanted to create an option for myself
[Guest]: that's it now scroll had a clear idea what they wanted the wire had a clear
[Guest]: idea what they wanted the Quint I'm sure had a beautiful business plan and they
[Guest]: are sticking to it and they are doing good work I am just an aberration I feel
[Guest]: I'm I'm this and also I had the privilege of having some bit of money
[Guest]: right if I did not have that money if if let's say a person does not have a
[Guest]: vignesh in their life I can't I can't be saying okay I'll start an organization I
[Guest]: figure out in one and a half years what I want to do so I had the privilege of
[Guest]: having that little bit of amount of money so I can't leave this advice
[Guest]: somebody else saying you start what you want and then you will learn yeah as
[Guest]: long as you have you don't have the burden of looking after your family or
[Guest]: you're not the sole earning member please go ahead but if you want to make
[Guest]: money if you have to also pay salaries then you better have a business plan in
[Amit Varma]: place at least a basic one don't be like me yeah I think that that advice of just
[Amit Varma]: start would probably work at the level of an individual creator but if you're
[Amit Varma]: actually going to start an organization you've got to have some sort of starting
[Amit Varma]: vision now as you guys developed right and and you've been very clear that you
[Amit Varma]: want alternative perspectives you're focused on the south and those are the
[Amit Varma]: directions you're going down on but the other sort of dilemma that must have
[Amit Varma]: hit you and I'm sure that you still live with is breadth versus depth that do you
[Amit Varma]: try to cover a lot of area within what you set out to do or do you just try
[Amit Varma]: give more time to individual stories and just you know do fewer stories but do
[Amit Varma]: them really well you know so the choice would be that okay I can have 10
[Amit Varma]: reporters in Andhra Pradesh across the place or I have two reporters you know
[Guest]: how have you dealt with this that again changes every year to be very truthful
[Guest]: that changes every year like one year we're thinking we will break every story
[Guest]: properly like we are not saying we'll break every story first but we'll break
[Guest]: every story properly next year we are thinking no we will not break all
[Guest]: stories we'll break a few important stories next year we're thinking
[Guest]: differently now we are in a different engine altogether and I think this is
[Guest]: the one I like is where I have a separate breaking news team which are
[Guest]: like four or five very efficient people they look at news and the other
[Guest]: reporters have their time to write their stories so you have both verticals going
[Guest]: there is no clashing of the two verticals and for depth you have depth
[Guest]: for immediate news because people trust us to a level that we will not give
[Guest]: wrong breaking news that if a building hasn't collapsed we'll say it has
[Guest]: collapsed that much trust people have in us and if a person hasn't died we are
[Guest]: not going to say they died it has happened that's why so that way we have
[Guest]: now divided the verticals and I think that works better for the news minute
[Guest]: and its audience but maybe one year down the line this plan would have changed so
[Guest]: it keeps changing but I prefer now to run an organization which will tell you
[Guest]: the immediate story but which will also go back to the story and tell you more
[Amit Varma]: details about it so earlier in this conversation and I've forgotten where
[Amit Varma]: because I did noted just a word down you you spoke about how you learned about
[Amit Varma]: leadership maybe it was in your college times or whatever but what was that like
[Amit Varma]: like as a manager how did you evolve like I think of myself my first sort of
[Amit Varma]: managerial responsibility was when I was a managing editor of quick info in the
[Amit Varma]: mid-aughties and I sucked and then later on when I was an editor at Pragati I
[Amit Varma]: think I was damn good because I thought a lot more about it and put some work
[Amit Varma]: into it and also I just changed as a person in the meantime so what was it
[Amit Varma]: like for you because you're you're thrown into the thick of things as a
[Amit Varma]: reporter first and then you kind of become a bureau chief in times now and
[Amit Varma]: so on and you're actually running a full bureau you're responsible for other
[Amit Varma]: people you're not just trying to sell your stories you want to sell their
[Amit Varma]: stories as well and make sure it's productive and now you're leading a
[Amit Varma]: startup you're leading a startup which is constantly under attack also which
[Amit Varma]: has faced existential threats and we'll talk about that as well so it's a whole
[Amit Varma]: different level of kind of motivation and management and you know unlike in a
[Amit Varma]: really big company you may not have a lot of systems in place so how has that
[Amit Varma]: changed you and how have you changed as a leader and how has the having to be a
[Guest]: leader changed you as a person so right from school or college if I am the leader
[Guest]: of the gang I've taught myself two things I was a I was a member of the
[Guest]: junior chambers like your Lions and Rotary right so in one of the classes
[Guest]: they taught me I mean it was one of those life lessons right sandwiching
[Guest]: what is a sandwich you have something really bad to say to a person like
[Guest]: really bad feedback to give so that's your patty so first you keep a slice of
[Guest]: bread which is hey you know you're really doing you're really improving but
[Guest]: this story sucks is your patty and then you keep another piece of bread below so
[Guest]: I have this has been my policy right from the beginning when I was junior
[Guest]: senior doesn't matter to me I am always a very sad in my office everybody knows
[Guest]: this now that I'm a sandwich person that the patty will come but it will be
[Guest]: camouflaged by two bread pieces but they know how to take it seriously and I
[Guest]: realized early that this is not a popularity contest leadership is not a
[Guest]: popularity contest you cannot at all points of time satisfy everybody keep
[Guest]: everybody happy you have to take certain difficult calls that has to be done
[Guest]: whether that's in my college school wherever that's one thing I've always
[Guest]: been clear about times though was very difficult to be a leader in times now
[Guest]: sucked my spirit away in the sense that when you work in a very intense news
[Guest]: room which can also be toxic in many ways you end up becoming exactly that I
[Guest]: mean I have I've had the misfortune of sitting on laptops sometimes opening a
[Guest]: computer and the last person would be the junior reporter in my office who
[Guest]: would have chatted about me to someone else and she would have she or he would
[Guest]: have kept it open and gone and they would have bitched about me so badly
[Guest]: right and at that time I felt like really bad but now when I think about it
[Guest]: I understand why they said so those things about me if honor was one level
[Guest]: the people in the Bombay office for level 2 and I was just level 3 I was the
[Guest]: whatever was being done by the boss is because you are transferring it to the
[Guest]: next next level right so I was doing the same to people who are working with me
[Guest]: so when I started the news minute the one thing which Vignesh told me is that
[Guest]: I won't have the same atmosphere here because he could every day my day starts
[Guest]: with screaming I'm screaming at people saying where are you why are you not
[Guest]: here you should have been it goes on so Vignesh said when you start a new
[Guest]: organization it will not be that so first thing was but it took me a lot of
[Guest]: time I mean imagine to not scream at people when you've already gotten used
[Guest]: to it but I think the leadership lesson that I have learned the most now is that
[Guest]: nobody knows everything and even if you're a leader in a team like for
[Guest]: example my colleague Ram who has been with me from the beginning he's also
[Guest]: very forceful I would say violent personality like me but he has a yeah he
[Guest]: has certain thought processes and I I know that that adds a lot of value to
[Guest]: the organization so I agree like sometimes I don't I don't agree with
[Guest]: what he says I I want to fight with him hit him or whatever but for the
[Guest]: organization I will say yes okay we'll follow what you say the same with Raga
[Guest]: Malika and Isaac these are all people who work with me Sowmya, Pooja, Sudipto
[Guest]: who has just joined us I don't agree with most of the stuff they say but what
[Guest]: lead what being a leader has taught me is that just swallow your pride listen
[Guest]: to what they have to say sometimes I'm evil like I will agree to what they're
[Guest]: saying waiting for that to fail and then I'll say I told you so that also happens
[Guest]: quite a bit and then I'll say okay you do guys do whatever you want after two
[Guest]: months I'll come and crack the whip and say you guys did this it didn't work out
[Guest]: so you learn on the way but the point is take everybody along and don't create a
[Guest]: toxic environment another very important thing I've learned is I used to take
[Guest]: pride in going to colleges and say the news is a 365 day business 24 hours you
[Guest]: get to be awake I don't say that anymore because people who work with me have
[Guest]: taught me that news need not be 24 hours you can have a life so that's a big
[Guest]: unlearning process I've had so if you're a leader also just listen to everybody
[Guest]: they have a lot of viewpoints maybe much better than yours. I love the way you're
[Amit Varma]: telling me about that evil side of you all of them are going to listen to this
[Guest]: I hope. They better that's another evil side I will make sure everybody listens
[Guest]: no no but I think they do know that I have an evil side like I do inception
[Guest]: you know like the grain of doubt I will put on one person in the sense if I want
[Guest]: someone to quit also slowly slowly I'll build on it but people do know it's not
[Amit Varma]: like a secret thing. So it's been tough right tell me a little bit about the
[Amit Varma]: tough times whatever you're comfortable talking about because I was chatting
[Amit Varma]: with Akar Patel a couple of days ago and I don't know how he does what he does
[Amit Varma]: and he's chilling he's happy he's like yeah they've taken my passport away but
[Amit Varma]: it's been COVID anyway what would I do with the passport it's safer with them
[Amit Varma]: that kind of rubbish but it can't be like that you know I read about what
[Amit Varma]: friends of mine go through and I feel bad I mean I feel you know I feel like I
[Amit Varma]: can't take it anymore I mean the process really is a punishment how is it how has
[Guest]: it been. So see there are different kinds of repercussions of what you do right
[Guest]: one is a normal one if you do a story somebody's pissed off with you the
[Guest]: person who's mentioned in the story is pissed off with you they can either go
[Guest]: to court or they're going to troll you that that is one that I can deal with
[Guest]: the second is this social media pressure which is really high I mean I'm sure a
[Guest]: lot of people have talked about it so I don't have to add anything to it but
[Guest]: that can impact your journalism you self-censor your work the third is what
[Guest]: the government does for us I think one of the biggest challenges has been this
[Guest]: whole income tax search which happened in our office and it was really funny
[Guest]: the income tax search and in one I mean we we like to make fun of it because
[Guest]: when they came to the office this this colleague who whose last date was he was
[Guest]: the only one there and they said we have come from the income tax department so
[Guest]: he thought he's not filed his taxes so he immediately went and brought his
[Guest]: Aadhaar and everything but they didn't tell him it's a search they said no it's
[Guest]: a search where is your exit and entry he said there's only one door it's a small
[Guest]: office only one door he said where is the marketing department he said no we
[Guest]: don't have any we just have three rooms everybody sits here and we don't have
[Guest]: any marketing people in in the news minute only one or two here and there so
[Guest]: they said okay we're going to seal all the doors you have to sit inside give
[Guest]: your laptop and phone and we'll conduct the search so he said boss there are
[Guest]: literally like no tables also in our office to keep documents and everything
[Guest]: we just keep here and there and then whenever Vignesh has to take it he will
[Guest]: take it home or keep it safe he said if you don't allow them to come I don't
[Guest]: know anything about how the news minute runs I just look after the Karnataka
[Guest]: Bureau so that officer understood that he's saying the truth he said okay call
[Guest]: the owners they called us and we came to office by then in our group it has been
[Guest]: told that income tax guys have come for search no need to come to office
[Guest]: immediately everybody comes to office because all of them want to be in
[Guest]: office and be excited about it the search went on it was not bad it was not
[Guest]: a bad experience for us it was not the same for Quinn but the I would say the
[Guest]: problem was that the case was based out of Noida we are in Bangalore which means
[Guest]: we had to have a chartered account in there a lawyer there that's a lot of
[Guest]: financial burden on us right as an organization and initially it was fine
[Guest]: they would send us notices we'll send replies but it is so stupid I cannot
[Guest]: imagine the government is spend is wasting away time of income tax officers
[Guest]: who should actually be doing some good work to ask the news minute who did you
[Guest]: pay rupees 500 to when every single transaction is through bank we don't
[Guest]: give cash to anyone every transaction is through the bank but they want voucher
[Guest]: for every freelancer we have paid like some camera person in some would appear
[Guest]: come home 500 rupees we paid they want that also then we had right back to each
[Guest]: of those people saying do you have the vouchers give the copies to us I mean
[Guest]: are you really making your income tax officials do this the entire day just
[Guest]: because you have a vendetta against someone and it went on and on and on for
[Guest]: three years the last six months were quite horrible because we would get
[Guest]: bunch of notices like 12 15 notices every week and they would ask for all
[Guest]: sorts of random stuff and I see I did not go through any of the tension
[Guest]: because Vignesh and Ram and everybody else had to do that not Ram Vignesh and
[Guest]: the chartered accountant had to do so they were managing it I do not have
[Guest]: anything to do till the last notice came the last notice was asking me to explain
[Guest]: whether I got a bribe from this mining baron called Shaker Reddy that really
[Guest]: upset me because if I wanted him if journalism was a way to make money it's
[Guest]: the easiest profession believe me I still remember the first time I went for
[Guest]: a press meet as a health reporter in New India Express was for a health camp
[Guest]: being organized by a like one of those clubs they gave in a in an envelope they
[Guest]: gave 500 rupees I was like why are you giving this money in Delhi nobody had
[Guest]: given me any money they said no we give all reporters who came I said no I don't
[Guest]: want I gave it back a lot of reporters don't take any money they are there they
[Guest]: have so much of integrity organizations of integrity so if I wanted to make
[Guest]: money there are hundred different ways to make money I don't have to write
[Guest]: against the government or against a politician I can just write for them
[Guest]: right so that upset me that the income tax department wanted me to prove that I
[Guest]: did not get a bribe from this guy it was based on one story by a Telugu media
[Guest]: basically at one point of time this Shekhar Reddy was arrested and income
[Guest]: tax department leaked his diary in the diary he's supposed to have mentioned
[Guest]: payments he made to AIDMK leaders when the story broke AIDMK was very upset and
[Guest]: they made up this fake document with a lot of names of journalists my name was
[Guest]: on top and they wrote Danya Rajendran flight to Hyderabad and stay in Taj and
[Guest]: they also made up a story that I am the Shekhar Reddy's concubine which is why
[Guest]: he was flying me to Hyderabad I have not even seen this person's face that now
[Guest]: that doesn't matter right so that that document was proved to be fake because a
[Guest]: lot of journalists were in different jobs during the year in which this
[Guest]: document is supposed to be so by evening everybody knew it's a fake document but
[Guest]: some 1 lakh people have seen it in Tamil Nadu because it's all over whatsapp
[Guest]: groups it's all over Facebook pages I can't go convince everybody that I have
[Guest]: not taken money from Shekhar Reddy nor can all the other journalists so I wrote
[Guest]: on Twitter you can intimidate me however you want I will continue to do the story
[Guest]: but I know there were a lot of journalists were upset that day when this
[Guest]: document was put out right because there will be people who will question their
[Guest]: integrity anyway that Telugu website wrote a story saying that all these
[Guest]: journalists react on Twitter and said the document is fake that's a story on
[Guest]: the Telugu website IT department takes that and says now you prove you didn't
[Guest]: pay the bribe I mean you didn't get the bribe you can't prove a negative yeah I
[Guest]: was so upset for days I was thinking why am I doing this job what that's the only
[Guest]: time I actually felt really upset thinking there's no point being truthful
[Guest]: also because they're definitely like there is this one big story which the
[Guest]: BJP guys have spread saying that I got a car from the DMK so anytime they want to
[Guest]: say anything they'll say I have this car to how many people will I say yes I
[Guest]: don't want to explain to people so I make a joke out of it I tell them that
[Guest]: this is not the brand I want or something else I make a joke out of it
[Guest]: but this was no longer a joke whenever people told me I make a joke out of it
[Guest]: but this when the income tax department sends you a notice and I'm explaining
[Guest]: this to my lawyer and my lawyer is like how are we going to explain this to the
[Guest]: income tax department that it's a fake document by the AIDMK blah blah blah
[Guest]: thankfully Times Now had recorded an interview with the AIDMK guy like a
[Guest]: spycam interview in which the guy says no it was a fake document and we just
[Guest]: did it to spite you guys and we got the video clip and we send that to the
[Guest]: department in one week's time the income tax case was closed against us but why
[Guest]: should I go through that because I run a news organization why should I go
[Guest]: through why should the government be using any agency to target someone in
[Guest]: any manner it's not just about me it's about a lot of organization which come
[Guest]: under pressure so that's the kind of atmosphere that we are dealing with
[Guest]: that's the kind of climate we are in but it does not deter me it does not make me
[Guest]: feel scared or make me feel like I shouldn't be doing it like my brother
[Guest]: going back my brother he keeps telling me in Malayalam
[Guest]: logam nee vijaricha nannaon bona liya means the world is not going to change
[Guest]: just because you want to change it why why do you do this he keeps asking me I
[Guest]: mean it's coming from a good place he thinks that there's just too much
[Guest]: pressure in my life or there's too much of tension but I think that's fine
[Guest]: everybody cannot be leading happy lives or going for holidays some people have
[Guest]: to have very stressful lives I feel so I'm one of those people I mean as you
[Guest]: said all this is not for for it like the story was a newsman it does today or the
[Guest]: scroll does today or whoever does today is not for a change today it will come
[Guest]: some point of time and I believe that I'm contributing to the process and in
[Guest]: that process I'm sure a lot of people are going to be against me some of my
[Guest]: work may not even be good or it may not be it may not be appreciated but it's
[Amit Varma]: fine I'll keep doing what I and I wouldn't even say that this is not a
[Amit Varma]: happy life I mean there is a certain kind of happiness and sense of
[Amit Varma]: satisfaction in doing all of this anyway of course so you know and also that
[Amit Varma]: that's interesting that you know times now recorded those guys saying it's fake
[Guest]: is or not to the rescue again he was not there then but he was in Republic
[Guest]: remember that's because times now journalists were also mentioned in the
[Amit Varma]: document ah so that's why they did it and you kind of benefited from that
[Amit Varma]: social media right and that is another thing that strikes me as just completely
[Amit Varma]: crazy I mean my way of dealing with the little trolling that I get cannot
[Amit Varma]: compare with people like you and Barkha but my way of dealing with it is I just
[Amit Varma]: block everybody if people are rude to me I block them if they are rude to my
[Amit Varma]: friends I block them if they just tweet something rude I block them even if I'm
[Amit Varma]: not involved so I just do it's like you know after demonetization happened and I
[Amit Varma]: started writing against it and one of my pieces went viral the entire right-wing
[Amit Varma]: IT cell just descended on me and I think I got addicted to blocking I would get
[Amit Varma]: dopamine hits so I would sit all day and I would just block block block and after
[Amit Varma]: a week there was this emptiness in my life because I had blocked them all
[Amit Varma]: luckily there are all kinds of other trolls who come after you but you know
[Amit Varma]: jokes jokes apart it's terrible and it's terrible for women the kind of trolling
[Amit Varma]: that happens every time I was telling Ram this every time you know I go on
[Amit Varma]: Twitter and I suddenly see my notifications full of abuse I know it's
[Amit Varma]: because either Barkha Dutt or Ram Guha have retweeted something and now their
[Amit Varma]: whole loyalist pelton has come to take it out on me as well and and it's much
[Amit Varma]: worse for women it's much worse for Barkha than for Ram so was you know was
[Amit Varma]: that something that disturbed you at the points in time how did you learn to cope
[Amit Varma]: with it I mean it's easy to say that hey don't look at your notifications but
[Amit Varma]: that's easier said than done right so how did you how did you kind of manage
[Guest]: to it so I don't block anyone the reason my logic is that I'll mute people I
[Guest]: don't want to know what they're saying but I want them to suffer me so I never
[Guest]: blocked them they should know what I am saying they hate me but they will still
[Guest]: see me on the timeline but some of my colleagues have access to my Twitter and
[Guest]: sometimes they know I'm feeling really upset they do go on my Twitter account
[Guest]: and block people oh I mean I have given them that freedom so especially my
[Guest]: colleague Raga she thinks that my timeline has to be cleaned so she'll go
[Guest]: and block people now I feel really bad after point out nobody's abusing me so
[Guest]: without telling Raga I go and unblock also I don't want to live in an echo
[Guest]: chamber see I am a news person I can't live in an echo chamber where everybody
[Guest]: saying the same thing where everybody thinks the same way so sometimes in the
[Guest]: night for entertainment before I go sleep I go check some of these rabid
[Guest]: accounts also if I want to bust fake news I want to call out fake narratives
[Guest]: I have to know what those people are thinking and saying right I can't live
[Guest]: in this happy bubble where everybody is agreeing with what I'm saying so I'm
[Guest]: never going to do that and I I would suggest to journalists who go out on the
[Guest]: ground and report don't do that how does it impact you it does impact you quite a
[Guest]: bit I've had a very bad experience with a Tamil actor Vijay's fans it was a
[Guest]: really stupid thing I went and watched a Shah Rukh Khan movie Harry met Sejal it
[Guest]: was so bad so I tweeted saying this is such a bad movie even Vijay's worst
[Guest]: movie is better than this so I was actually praising the Vijay movie but it
[Guest]: became a huge problem but it did not impact me as such because I knew that I
[Guest]: was I was right and they are wrong but what happened is they went to my timeline
[Guest]: and took all my stupid old tweets like some 15 years ago I made fun of Karna
[Guest]: Nidhi once which I think I should not have done I should not have done but
[Guest]: they took screenshots and the DMK turns against me then I would have made fun of
[Guest]: some other see in 2011-10 when I started using Twitter first thing I was pregnant
[Guest]: 2011 I had a baby so I was sitting at home and if you look at any of the worst
[Guest]: tweets of mine which goes a screenshot it's all during that period when I'm not
[Guest]: working so those are times I've made the crack the worst jokes on Twitter and
[Guest]: everything became a screenshot which became very problematic and I still like
[Guest]: 10 years later in 2011-22 also people make fun of me for that they say you said
[Guest]: this about him then I have changed as a person I am a new person altogether that
[Guest]: doesn't matter to them and I'm not going to convince all those people I don't
[Guest]: care but it brought a lot of tension a lot of pressure I couldn't sleep at
[Guest]: nights I would get nightmares my eyes with my I'll be like blinking blinking
[Guest]: blinking I do not even know how to vocalize it to Vignesh because I felt
[Guest]: like telling somebody I'm feeling very upset about a trolling sort of made me a
[Guest]: weak person so in the beginning I wouldn't tell anyone I would feel very
[Guest]: upset about it but I won't tell anyone because I'm the strong woman who's
[Guest]: fighting it right it was getting to me like I was becoming a different person I
[Guest]: was self-censoring myself my opinions were becoming less opinionated and
[Guest]: suddenly I think in 2018 or something there's actor Malayalam called Parvati
[Guest]: she wrote something against Mammootty she said something against Mammootty in
[Guest]: an event and imagine the kind of trolling she faces which is five ten
[Guest]: times more than me she gets rape threats I mean I also got rape threats but she
[Guest]: got much more than me so I just pinged her one day saying that hi I am Dhanya
[Guest]: I'm a journalist I understand what you're going through anytime you want
[Guest]: you can call and speak we started speaking and then soon she connected me
[Guest]: to her friend called Adira I another friend Aisha and another actor called
[Guest]: Reema we became this gang of five women we have a public face and we have a
[Guest]: private face obviously so and we all are trolled quite a bit so we became like a
[Guest]: I mean I could speak to them I could tell them that is what I'm feeling
[Guest]: because they were going through exactly the same and I could vocalize it and
[Guest]: really help me so I tell all women who come into my newsroom also that find
[Guest]: people your friends family strangers whoever it is but who takes cyber
[Guest]: harassment seriously who understand that it's okay to feel upset about it that
[Guest]: it's not about bravery or courage that you can feel very upset about this and
[Guest]: talk about it that gang when we came together 2018 we are still very good
[Guest]: friends that really helped me but from then on I could vocalize it to other
[Guest]: people like smaller gangs I have in or within my office and that helps me a lot
[Guest]: so now I'm not bothered if I'm bothered one day I will tell my friends that this
[Guest]: is happening I'm feeling upset about it mostly I try to make a joke out of it
[Guest]: but I want to tell all young journalists out there that nobody's trivializing
[Guest]: online harassment it is really serious it can impact your work beyond a point
[Guest]: don't pay attention to it but don't completely close yourself to it also I
[Guest]: mean Barkha Dutt is getting at a level which is unimaginable right or a Rana
[Guest]: Ayub's timeline if I go so all of us get it the other day for example Siddharth
[Guest]: Varadarajan had tweeted about this case against them in in one of the courts in
[Guest]: Telangana where 14 stories which which the wire did had to be pulled down
[Guest]: because the court said so Bharat biotech stories so Siddharth tweeted saying that
[Guest]: Bharat biotech's bullying won't work after he tweeted I tweeted saying that
[Guest]: the courts are always use using this as an excuse and just taking down stories
[Guest]: without asking for the words of the journalist if you go to his tweet in my
[Guest]: tweet you can actually see the number of abuses he got compared to mine it's so
[Guest]: much lesser now he's editor of the wire he is double the following as me
[Guest]: shouldn't he get abused more it's very sad he should get abused just because
[Guest]: I'm a woman they want to abuse me more that's the reality of social media but I
[Guest]: take I mean I have had experiences when I've told my office people to mute
[Guest]: Twitter not to check it check notifications because young people in
[Guest]: newsrooms can get impacted right and the biggest fear I have is that once you get
[Guest]: trolled for a story you are going to self-censor yourself as a journalist and
[Guest]: you are going to push yourself to like for example a Prajwal he does a story on
[Guest]: the hijab he has a certain vision he has done the story if everybody is going to
[Guest]: tell him you didn't find fault to the campus front of India you didn't find
[Guest]: fault at the PFI next time he's going to be forced to think on the ground should
[Guest]: I take that angle also just to back counter batches to monkey balance a
[Guest]: story so I don't want any journalist to be impacted that way so I tell I have
[Guest]: conversations I tell them don't mind you do what you have to do if you think it
[Guest]: has we talked about you talk about it so that's one flip side of social media
[Guest]: either journalist self-censor or they try to monkey balance yeah I mean I
[Amit Varma]: loved it story about the five women coming together you know solidarity and
[Amit Varma]: friendship and that's such a touching kind of story going back to that echo
[Amit Varma]: chamber thing I mean the reason I block is just for rudeness not for views so I
[Amit Varma]: have great conversations with people who don't agree with me which is pretty
[Amit Varma]: much everyone but so it's the views don't matter you want diversity of views
[Amit Varma]: but you want diversity of views from people who will talk to you on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: like they would talk to you in real life if anyone is behaving on Twitter in a
[Amit Varma]: way that they wouldn't behave in real life which is basically rudeness then I
[Amit Varma]: kind of just block them but of course I have nowhere near the magnitude of
[Amit Varma]: problem that people like you and Barkha and really any woman with an opinion out
[Amit Varma]: there has and I'm reminded of the Ashish Nehra solution also have I ever
[Amit Varma]: mentioned this no so the Ashish Nehra solution basically is this that Ashish
[Amit Varma]: Nehra once did something and everybody was trolling him for it madly so the
[Amit Varma]: journalist goes to him and he says that everybody's trolling you up don't you
[Amit Varma]: feel bad and Nehra just smiles and shows him his phone which is one of these old
[Amit Varma]: Nokia phones back in the day push button it's not a smartphone so now if someone
[Amit Varma]: is not on social media how are you going to troll them you're going to like go
[Amit Varma]: outside their house and throw emojis into the living room or whatever but not
[Amit Varma]: everyone has that luxury I think you know people like you do have to be on
[Amit Varma]: social media and have that kind of public facing face as far as self
[Amit Varma]: censorship is concerned you know I just find that I do kind of self-censor
[Amit Varma]: myself on Twitter in the sense that why get into this you know random bullshit
[Amit Varma]: you know whether it's from the books or the works frankly you just don't want to
[Amit Varma]: get into random fights and get mobbed but I don't self-censor at all in the
[Amit Varma]: work that I do which is either if I'm writing or I'm doing my podcast or
[Amit Varma]: whatever I am what I am there is no self-censorship I think Twitter is in a
[Amit Varma]: sense you know kind of especially toxic looking at social media like one of the
[Amit Varma]: disturbing trends and I don't know how true it is today that I would see is
[Amit Varma]: that a lot of journalists and media houses would take their cues from
[Amit Varma]: Twitter there used to be a day you would have edit meetings and people would
[Amit Varma]: discuss ideas and all and I felt that for a certain bunch of lazy journalists
[Amit Varma]: if not the vast majority of them the process now simply was you go on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: you see what's trending you figure out a story there sometimes Twitter is a story
[Amit Varma]: sometimes you discover it through Twitter and that's deeply problematic
[Amit Varma]: because so much of what's trending on Twitter is number one is constructed and
[Amit Varma]: so much of the Twitter discourse is really simplistic it's about black and
[Amit Varma]: white someone is either a hero or they're the devil incarnate and
[Amit Varma]: obviously journalists good journalists want to engage with complexity so is
[Amit Varma]: this a trend that you have noticed is it you know is it still there has it become
[Amit Varma]: less how do you guys look for stories when you know what are your processes
[Guest]: like so Twitter Facebook whatever it is there a source of information you can
[Guest]: discard that source or you need not discard I mean I look at it only that
[Guest]: way a lot of people reach out to me through DMS they tell them tell me their
[Guest]: stories or issues they face for me it's just a source of information beyond that
[Guest]: nothing it's also a place where I transmit information these are two
[Guest]: things for me now the self-censorship which I talked about is see journalism
[Guest]: is a daily thing right and if you get an abundance of abuse or if you get a lot
[Guest]: of opinion you are you are human you are going to think that way so that's why
[Guest]: young journalists I think when they start journalism they do get a bit
[Guest]: flustered by all the attention on social media and they do end up doing these
[Guest]: stories which is trending on Twitter Facebook but I've largely seen people
[Guest]: moving out of that people do move out of that they realize that the story is on
[Guest]: the ground you have to go to the ground and speak you have to follow processes
[Guest]: so I don't think anybody is doing only Twitter based stories for like 10 years
[Guest]: of their career there is a cycle which all of us go through where one or two
[Guest]: years we are paying a lot of attention to what is on social media but slowly
[Guest]: you realize okay 20% attention to social media 80% don't give so I've never had a
[Guest]: trouble where I have to constantly tell people not to be on social media the
[Guest]: trouble I faced is that a lot of people cannot multitask so if they're doing a
[Guest]: story they'll just do that story and then they don't know what is the chatter
[Guest]: around them see you can't ignore chatter right because society is all about
[Guest]: chatter and social media is reflective of that chatter though a lot of it is
[Guest]: constructed so I the only problem I have faced is telling people also pay
[Guest]: attention to social media because it's either it's either people who are
[Guest]: addicted to it or people who don't want to look at it I think everybody has
[Guest]: strike a balance especially journalists you cannot shut yourself away from it
[Guest]: neither can you be completely immersed in it but I think with experience and
[Amit Varma]: time people learn how to do that and you know when I read your thread about the
[Amit Varma]: income tax rates the thought that struck me is that journalism has changed in a
[Amit Varma]: really fundamental way from 30 years ago the 20 years ago things were pretty bad
[Amit Varma]: and I'm kind of glad that that's it's dissipated and it's over but one
[Amit Varma]: fundamental negative way in which which is changed is that either you on one
[Amit Varma]: side you have media houses which are following the line of the government in
[Amit Varma]: power and they'll do that regardless of which government is in power because the
[Amit Varma]: government has carrots in terms of all the government advertising it can give
[Amit Varma]: out to them and equally it has sticks in terms of you know rate karwa dingi
[Amit Varma]: yeh karwa dingi woh karwa dingi so that's one part of the media which is no
[Amit Varma]: longer which is basically engaged on the government side in the great narrative
[Amit Varma]: battles that have replaced our public discourse and that have replaced
[Amit Varma]: journalism to a large extent and on the other hand you have people like you and
[Amit Varma]: all the people we've discussed the wire and news laundry and so on where it
[Amit Varma]: seems that all of you are being forced to go above and beyond what journalism
[Amit Varma]: should be you should not have to deal with this on a daily basis the way that
[Amit Varma]: you do but all of you do it and what that means is that you're forced not
[Amit Varma]: only to be journalists not only to be entrepreneurs which is a separate
[Amit Varma]: question and journalists shouldn't have to be entrepreneurs but you're forced
[Amit Varma]: not only to be journalists but you're also forced to be crusaders that seems
[Amit Varma]: deeply unfair to me and it also seems to me that then that then reduces the scope
[Amit Varma]: for good journalism because in people who do want to go do good journalism but
[Amit Varma]: don't have the appetite for the crusade the appetite for the fight which it is
[Amit Varma]: fine not everyone does you know then what happens and and therefore I I feel
[Amit Varma]: and maybe I'm being too negative and I usually am that good journalism is
[Amit Varma]: therefore not possible in India unless you are also a crusader unless you also
[Amit Varma]: have that spirit and that seems to me to be very sad because you should not have
[Guest]: to so I will answer the the two segments of your question the first is I have a
[Guest]: small disagreement because this is something I have learned recently that
[Guest]: these media channels if you're talking about TV channels they take the
[Guest]: government side because they get money from the government etc right I think
[Guest]: that is wrong considering let's take an Anand Goswami or a Rahul Shiv Shankar or
[Guest]: whoever it is these are the same people who went behind the UPA for two terms
[Guest]: when UPA was there rightfully so for all the corruption they did they went behind
[Guest]: the UPA at that time did the ad stop them no it did not they questioned
[Guest]: people in power which is why I was part of that those channels because I really
[Guest]: genuinely thought they are questioning people in power now I think things have
[Guest]: gone to a point where it is no longer about advertisement it is no longer
[Guest]: about money or revenue these people are fundamentally ideologically agreeing
[Guest]: with the government so questioning them is not an issue at all for them they
[Guest]: don't want to question them because they are ideologically now aligned with them
[Guest]: so it is no longer about revenue if they really wanted they can behave the same
[Guest]: way when the UPA was in power are you saying there are no scams today there's
[Guest]: nothing to question the government daily bigotry that they perpetuate why
[Guest]: is that not being done because you have taken an ideological position like I
[Guest]: have a lot of critics in my own family who will say oh you are you are overly
[Guest]: critical of this government you're always against Modi ji I asked them boss
[Guest]: when I was covering the ISRO scam or I was covering the 2g scam or the or the
[Guest]: Tatra truck scam you don't have a problem you applauded me saying I'm
[Guest]: questioning the government I'm doing the same thing today you have changed I
[Guest]: haven't I continue to do my job at that time I question that government today I
[Guest]: question this government which deserves to be questioned more because they're
[Guest]: also spreading bigotry Siddharth Adharajan for example since we spoke
[Guest]: about him he was editor of the Hindu when Hindu broke some of the biggest
[Guest]: stories during UPA of some of the scams did these people call him anti-national
[Guest]: then did they talk about his US passport and citizenship or whatever shit they
[Guest]: talk about now he hasn't changed he questions the government he questioned
[Guest]: the government then yes perhaps he questions this government with more
[Guest]: vigor and more you know with more passion that's because of a lot of other
[Guest]: things that they end up doing right but you as a reader consumer has changed
[Guest]: because your your commitment is no longer to your country your commitment
[Guest]: is to that government the same way I believe these news channels which were
[Guest]: once asking questions to the government have ideologically changed let it be an
[Guest]: Aaj Tak or you know all those plethora of Hindi channels I don't watch them I
[Guest]: mean I don't watch any channels but I see the clippings on Twitter and I see
[Guest]: my own colleagues people I've worked with have changed so much like there was
[Guest]: this really sickening story from Kerala called narcotics jihad did that Bishop
[Guest]: know one person who has who was given whatever narcotics by a Muslim man to a
[Guest]: Hindu woman he doesn't know of any real examples but I've seen people who I
[Guest]: work with talk about that story as if this narcotics jihad is a big deal
[Guest]: instead of just saying that Bishop is a liar I mean he he's just a communal
[Guest]: person who wants to create trouble so they've all taken positions now
[Guest]: unfortunately that is how the Indian media scene is so that's the first part
[Guest]: of the answer what was the second part on second part was on it was about should
[Guest]: you have to be a good journalism that's a very difficult question and I know
[Guest]: that a lot of journalists find it especially difficult in the social media
[Guest]: scene for example they have you know if I was marketing for South India in times
[Guest]: now here they have to market their story they have to ensure that it's read more
[Guest]: that they are more opinionated vocal for people to read for people to identify
[Guest]: but I think the news minute we sort of have a balance where these people go to
[Guest]: the ground they do the reports like if the Harita from Kerala Prajwal so many
[Guest]: people but I am sort of that person who takes the flack or the crusader face I
[Guest]: bank on those stories that's the real hard work right they're actually going
[Guest]: out but I don't want them to be at the receiving end also so I become the face
[Guest]: who gets abused most if if I wanted those reporters to put their face out
[Guest]: there all the time it's very dangerous for them also so they shouldn't be made
[Guest]: crusaders but there are some people who don't have a problem they don't mind it
[Guest]: they can take that pressure they want to do it no problem you can do it but I
[Guest]: don't think every journalist should expect to become a crusader or that
[Guest]: every story should have an impact every story story should usher in change these
[Guest]: are all unrealistic expectations it is not going to happen you shouldn't feel
[Guest]: disappointed your duty is to tell that story at that point of time you are
[Amit Varma]: noting it for posterity that's it. Wonderful and I'm really that that's
[Amit Varma]: what you said in the first part of the answer is something I'll have to process
[Amit Varma]: because it's a stark insight that you know that they're not necessarily just
[Amit Varma]: opportunistic cowards they are perhaps true believers and I don't know which is
[Amit Varma]: worse you know do I prefer the opportunistic coward to the true
[Amit Varma]: believer I mean I don't even know at some level if there is a difference
[Amit Varma]: because you the actions amount to the same thing but there is a difference and
[Amit Varma]: and the difference is that you know following the the hijab crisis for
[Amit Varma]: example the hijab controversy and just seeing all the stories you guys have
[Amit Varma]: done on it also and the most depressing thing about it is that it is irrelevant
[Amit Varma]: to me that whole issue of whether hijab is good or bad is irrelevant to me even
[Amit Varma]: the whole issue of these are the rights our Constitution guarantees you is not
[Amit Varma]: the central story the central story is not a story of rights the central story
[Amit Varma]: is a story of something that is happening within a society and it's hate
[Amit Varma]: and it's hate for Muslims right and it's growing and this is one example so what
[Amit Varma]: you said earlier about true believers just feeds into that and it's kind of
[Amit Varma]: happening all around us and it's one of those things that really depresses me
[Amit Varma]: that day after day in unexpected ways these little things happen where you see
[Amit Varma]: manifestations of this kind of hate and you and your team are out on the ground
[Amit Varma]: a lot right so just looking at this one angle you know one way of looking at it
[Amit Varma]: is that this hate has always been dormant within many people and then
[Amit Varma]: didn't express it and now they're expressing it now they've been emboldened
[Amit Varma]: now they're on the winning side let it all come out right the other angle is
[Amit Varma]: that this hate was maybe something that has been amplified by the politics of
[Amit Varma]: the day and they are feeding off each other and it's a kind of symbiotic
[Amit Varma]: process right so what's your take on this because like me I'm sure you have
[Amit Varma]: also seen many people you used to know once and who seemed reasonable and
[Amit Varma]: perfectly nice and whatever suddenly being like this so what is your sense
[Amit Varma]: that since you guys go out a lot you talk to people a lot were we always like
[Amit Varma]: this under the surface or have things really got gotten worse have people
[Amit Varma]: become more evil because that it's just so first thing the danger of having
[Guest]: journalists were true believers is that they are not going to change if the
[Guest]: government changes exactly they have this agenda now and they are very
[Guest]: majority-centric bigoted fellows even if the government changes they have this
[Guest]: agenda set and they are going to continue with it which is why I think it
[Guest]: is very important that we identify them as true believers who will push the
[Guest]: agenda no matter who the government is I mean I see this as a pattern they target
[Guest]: all regional parties right it's not like I'm in love with any of the regional
[Guest]: parties but I find them better choices than just two national parties looking
[Guest]: after an entire country but these national channels go after regional
[Guest]: parties it is a proper agenda they do not want regional parties to come up
[Guest]: now is any party so perfect there is no corruption they don't you know they
[Guest]: don't have a dynasty politics etc no every party is the same it is just
[Guest]: grades somebody's really evil somebody's bad like that but I clearly see an
[Guest]: agenda as far as national television is concerned to go against the regional
[Guest]: parties why because they want the BJP in power forever and ever so I I want to
[Guest]: recognize that agenda as an ideological one I don't want to be saying that it's
[Guest]: only because they want revenue for the channel no they want that government
[Guest]: because they also think that it is okay for Muslims to become second-class
[Guest]: citizens or whatever it is right the second part which is about society and
[Guest]: whether I keep oscillating in the sense that I have a friend you know the
[Guest]: festival called Onam in Kerala you we buy new clothes so her father wouldn't
[Guest]: let her buy green clothes at that point of time we never understood what it is
[Guest]: later we figured out that is because the IUML Indian Union Muslim League's flag
[Guest]: color is green the Pakistan flag color is green so you don't wear green because
[Guest]: you're a Muslim green is a Muslim color is what a lot of people in Kerala think
[Guest]: that's why she was not allowed to shop I have had uncles and when I broke up with
[Guest]: my first boyfriend and eventually maybe I'll get married sorts nobody's ever
[Guest]: asked me like are you getting married but they will say you know choose anyone
[Guest]: but not a Dalit or not a Muslim they'll tell you but very subdued today they can
[Guest]: write Facebook posts about it and there will be like 100 people applauding them
[Guest]: so hatred was always there it was just deep buried because they had no outlet
[Guest]: now they're cheered on their emboldened and there are no consequences to it
[Guest]: therefore people are happy to spit out whatever venom is inside them the other
[Guest]: question is about do you want to change people do you want to like have
[Guest]: conversations I have you know I have oscillated very differently every year
[Guest]: I am a different person like there are years when I've sat and fought in
[Guest]: whatsapp groups valiantly saying this is not correct is not correct then I will
[Guest]: go into a shell and think let these people believe what they want I'm not
[Guest]: going to interfere then I again I will go into a cycle where I want to change
[Guest]: everyone so that keeps changing but for me one game changer was the Sabarimala
[Guest]: incident now when you have friends who are who believe in the right wing or
[Guest]: when you have family who believes in the right wing and you know one thing which
[Guest]: you must have been told is that but if it is a real genocide or if there is
[Guest]: really violence they will not support they are just supporting all this
[Guest]: because they want better opportunities a better India which was like vibrant
[Guest]: Gujarat and all that but when it comes to real violence they will not support
[Guest]: so you are under the impression that this person who's supporting this
[Guest]: government or or any other party I'm just saying BJP here but let's say some
[Guest]: other party also is doing it for certain reasons when the Sabarimala temple
[Guest]: opened for women I have a correspondent and she's a Kerala Bureau Chief Sarita
[Guest]: she had gone to Sabarimala along with my current colleague Pooja who was with
[Guest]: Republic at that time when they reached a certain place they were beaten up very
[Guest]: badly in the sense that Sarita somebody kicked her with the boots on her back
[Guest]: and she was hospitalized for many weeks Pooja was also assaulted very badly by
[Guest]: the right-wing groups who did not want women to go including journalists to go
[Guest]: anywhere near Sabarimala till then I was in all my family groups so when this
[Guest]: incident happened and they knew that a reporter in my organization was beaten
[Guest]: up there were still so many people who commented including my very close
[Guest]: family saying that why did you send a woman reporter this is provocation in
[Guest]: one way so they were indirectly endorsing that violence that week I
[Guest]: decided I am going to exit all these groups I couldn't because immediately
[Guest]: floods happened and I wanted help from people but I exited because it was no
[Guest]: longer a hypothetical situation for me that if an incident of violence happens
[Guest]: these guys won't support it they are just otherwise for vibrant society
[Guest]: vibrant India I realized when violence happens also they will find a reason to
[Guest]: support when Gauri Lankesh was shot down so many people on my Facebook wall said
[Guest]: Gauri Lankesh should not have been murdered but why did she say all this I
[Guest]: don't want to be in touch with people who say but anymore but the last six
[Guest]: months I have been thinking Danya can you afford to do that maybe you should
[Guest]: invest some time into fighting with people of fighting with people again so
[Guest]: I'm on this thought process is again started in me that I should get back
[Guest]: into all those groups and fight maybe I will change one or two people's thought
[Amit Varma]: process I don't know no I mean our mental equilibrium gets messed up that
[Amit Varma]: way and the rule to remember about but as I keep saying is that whenever there
[Amit Varma]: is a sentence and then a but comes in it you know that everything before that but
[Amit Varma]: is exact you know it's just so this there is kind of so much hypocrisy there
[Guest]: and and I do that as a daily thing right I mean in my stories I'm questioning
[Guest]: those people who are saying but now after I finish an entire day which is of
[Guest]: stressful in many ways I look at news I did copies we put it out we push it do
[Guest]: I then go home and then again indulge with another group of people who are
[Guest]: still saying but but but see if I was doing another job like I was doing a
[Guest]: happy job in the morning and I had a lot of time in the evening to just fight
[Guest]: with people which is my own family and friends I would gladly do it I have a
[Guest]: lot of energy but my whole body of work is this so I rather I would rather send
[Guest]: links to people then sit and indulge in their conversations yeah but I don't
[Guest]: know can we again can we afford to exist like that can we just cut off people
[Guest]: saying that if you don't believe in what I say then I don't want to have any
[Guest]: connection with you I don't want to like there are a lot of family members I
[Guest]: speak to about what did you eat today we meet in parties and like hi we'll talk
[Guest]: about school days colleges but beyond that I have no connection but I don't
[Guest]: know can we afford to do that can all of us who believe in certain things just
[Guest]: disengage ourselves from others at what point of time do we start engaging with
[Amit Varma]: them I am not very sure I mean I thought about this a little bit where maybe a
[Amit Varma]: decade and a half ago there was that law in Maharashtra about how you have to
[Amit Varma]: stand in theaters for the national anthem right and obviously my problem
[Amit Varma]: there is with the coercion otherwise if you play the thing I'll stand on my own
[Amit Varma]: but so as a matter of principle because I don't want to be forced to do anything
[Amit Varma]: I decided that I would always sit and I did that for a few weeks one or two
[Amit Varma]: altercations never got beaten up did that for a few weeks in fact went on
[Amit Varma]: Barkha Dutt's we the people to defend my stand and Smriti Irani who was this was
[Amit Varma]: 2008-2009 she got upset with me and I'll share a clip of it at one point you know
[Amit Varma]: Barkha she's talking about the her last question was she was talking about the
[Amit Varma]: anthem and the flag and all that and she turned to me she was asking all the
[Amit Varma]: panelists that do you think there should be any holy cows and my answer was the
[Amit Varma]: only kind of holy cow I like is a divine steak on my plate and the look that's
[Amit Varma]: oh my god yeah so anyway so but my but after that I stopped doing that in the
[Amit Varma]: sense I stopped sitting I would just stand and my reasoning was and where I
[Amit Varma]: draw the line is this my reasoning was that at an individual level one person
[Amit Varma]: in a cinema hall is not going to make a difference so there I will not bother to
[Amit Varma]: fight where I will fight where I will continue fighting without mincing words
[Amit Varma]: isn't what I write or maybe today in today's context it could be the podcast
[Amit Varma]: or whatever so there where there is a public facing side where my words can
[Amit Varma]: scale where what I create can scale I will fight but in my individual spaces I
[Amit Varma]: will simply not bother because the difference that I might make is too
[Amit Varma]: little to justify the effort and the cost so I guess in your context right
[Amit Varma]: that would mean that if you go home just chill but in office all day please do
[Guest]: what you're doing no but my problem is because I'm very strongly opinionated I
[Guest]: don't want to have even individual personal connection with some of these
[Guest]: people now that is my problem then I'm thinking that maybe I should engage with
[Guest]: them a bit more I don't want to cut off like literally I've cut off 90% people I
[Guest]: feel that leaves me with practically no one to speak to except a few people I
[Guest]: can still have conversations with which is why I'm thinking maybe Saturday
[Guest]: Sundays whenever I'm not working I will devote some time to trolling them on
[Guest]: whatsapp groups of family so I am yet to take a decision on that so here's a
[Amit Varma]: question you know let's say let's take it for granted that many people are
[Amit Varma]: like this let's say the majority of people have this hate for Muslims okay
[Amit Varma]: let's kind of begin with that assumption I would still not get completely
[Amit Varma]: pessimistic and give up on it because my contention always is that all of us
[Amit Varma]: contain multitudes so there might be a person who you know one part of his
[Amit Varma]: personality has this bigotry or has this misogyny or whatever but also he wants
[Amit Varma]: good jobs for his kids also he wants to live a good life there are different
[Amit Varma]: aspects to their nature that one can appeal to you know pinkers face a better
[Amit Varma]: angels of our nature for example there are other aspects and I find that there
[Amit Varma]: is one there is a lack of imagination and politics that we don't try for this
[Amit Varma]: that we take the Hindu vote for granted so that every party is kind of at least
[Amit Varma]: at least in the north just looks at it as a hygiene factor that we can't piss
[Amit Varma]: off the so-called Hindu vote but as journalists as someone who dives into
[Amit Varma]: this complexity every day do you think that there is something here do you
[Amit Varma]: think that this is a cause for hope that maybe to all of us you know even for a
[Amit Varma]: bigot who doesn't like Muslims you know even for a misogynist who thinks his
[Amit Varma]: wife's place is only in the kitchen are there other aspects of their nature that
[Guest]: one can appeal to to make a better society yeah in fact that's something
[Guest]: which I keep telling my newsroom that look let's always not talk about
[Guest]: bigotry let's also talk about patriarchy because there is high chance that both
[Guest]: these people are from the same you know same shed or whatever are from the same
[Guest]: group but when you talk about when you question patriarchal structures when you
[Guest]: write about that there is a higher chance that they will identify with that
[Guest]: story and change their thought process and if you can influence them there then
[Guest]: slowly you influence them in other spheres of life so don't always think
[Guest]: you have to speak about one thing to one person you can you can appeal to them in
[Guest]: different ways that how do you make a person think progressively if not in one
[Guest]: way you have to look for another option right so that's one thing I definitely
[Guest]: do and I don't know I mean I never say no to colleges or schools who call me
[Guest]: because I feel like I need to speak to those age groups more I don't want them
[Guest]: to I don't want to influence their thinking like my own son he has a friend
[Guest]: who thinks Donald Trump is the best thing which happened to America and my
[Guest]: son is like Amma I don't think you like Trump but my friend is saying Trump is
[Guest]: the best thing which happened to America so I'm just controlling my anger and I'm
[Guest]: like no Vedant see this is what happened to immigrants I try to explain to him I
[Guest]: don't know if he's going to take my viewpoint or he thinks his friend is
[Guest]: better but I have to try therefore I never say no to schools or colleges I go
[Guest]: for all the events I tell them I mean I don't use big words or very complicated
[Guest]: stuff but I tell them this is what is happening this is what it is I but I
[Guest]: don't want to engage with everyone who's like 30 years old 40 years old 50 years
[Guest]: old and it is not my job to change the way people think that's a natural
[Guest]: process that has to happen and I am only aiding that process by writing things by
[Guest]: running an organization by having a group of journalists in individual space
[Guest]: I think I have renounced myself from doing all this but like I said maybe I
[Guest]: will go back to it also depending upon how much energy I have and as my son
[Guest]: grows older I think I'll have to do more of that right because I'll have to do
[Guest]: some interventions like at one point of time he stopped eating beef because
[Guest]: somebody in his playground said that we don't eat beef cows sacred I do not want
[Guest]: to question him at all because that's fine if he thinks he doesn't want to eat
[Guest]: beef he doesn't have to nobody's forcing him but we went to a restaurant which
[Guest]: has his favorite steak which is Sunny's and then nobody asked him to order he
[Guest]: himself ordered after that that rule is forgotten like he's forgotten but now he
[Guest]: has a rule in our house where nobody can eat pork we went to Nagarhole to see
[Guest]: tigers and he fell in love with pigs in the forest and so he stopped eating and
[Guest]: it's almost been a year I think but that's a better reason that's a good
[Guest]: reason so the point is do I want then tell my son it's okay we should eat beef
[Guest]: we should eat pork I want him to slowly understand so we went to a party where
[Guest]: he did not allow my husband to eat pork so there's another guest there who's a
[Guest]: lawyer I can't I don't know her name she came and told my son that look you
[Guest]: cannot control other people's food if you don't want to eat you don't eat but
[Guest]: she said in such a convincing way that after my son has allowed my husband to
[Guest]: eat right so I don't want to be forceful but I want my son or young other young
[Guest]: people to know that there are so many different ways to think about a subject
[Guest]: don't don't restrict yourself to your parent who's watching Republic every
[Guest]: night or Times Now every night and things in in one way don't be that
[Guest]: person and I would tell all parents if you're watching news channels don't make
[Guest]: your children watch along with you whatever you have become you are happy
[Guest]: with it that's fine but let's not influence their thought process beyond
[Guest]: but I also understand the danger of this therefore I I do want to do some
[Guest]: interventions as far as my son goes and that's the same way I look at speaking
[Guest]: at a college or a school I will do some interventions but I don't want to
[Guest]: brainwash them I don't want to I don't want to insist that they think in the
[Amit Varma]: way that I want them to think yeah and as an act of civil disobedience you and
[Amit Varma]: Vignesh should keep eating beef and pork at home because you know one of the
[Amit Varma]: reasons I like coming to Bangalore is bloody I'm coming from Mumbai where we
[Amit Varma]: don't get beef as you know really yeah yeah so when we come here it's it's
[Amit Varma]: banned and but you still get it here huh you still get it here which is why I
[Amit Varma]: love coming to Bangalore so for me Bangalore is about okay the work is in
[Amit Varma]: the recordings and but the fun is in meeting people and the food yeah the
[Amit Varma]: food is a you know so you guys are so lucky just to be kind of but see how you
[Guest]: and me have self-censored ourselves a lot 10 years ago maybe you would have
[Guest]: shared a picture of the steak that you ate in Bangalore absolutely now you will
[Guest]: think what is a necessity if I put a picture on Twitter I'll get like 500
[Guest]: people abusing me so we have all changed there is absolutely now no doubt social
[Guest]: media has changed the way we react publicly the people around us have
[Guest]: changed so much that we in our individual spaces we are reacting
[Guest]: differently now so I don't know it is it is quite stressful for people who believe
[Guest]: in progressive values but I really hope the younger generation will make things
[Amit Varma]: easier for us I mean I had lunch with Ram Guha and his son Keshava at Sunny's
[Amit Varma]: the other day and you can guess what I ordered and of course I would not put a
[Amit Varma]: picture of it on Twitter but I'm happy to talk about it here because different
[Amit Varma]: mediums so that also kind of makes a difference so you know as as we reach
[Amit Varma]: towards wrapping it up because you've been so patient though admittedly your
[Amit Varma]: foot is broken so where can you go but you've been really patient so a couple
[Amit Varma]: of final kind of questions and one is that you know there's one side of you
[Amit Varma]: which we've spoken about today which is the one side of you I know without
[Amit Varma]: having met you because it's a public side you are the fearless journalist
[Amit Varma]: you're doing this news entrepreneur and so on and so forth and we've seen that
[Amit Varma]: side tell me a little bit more about sort of the personal side like what is
[Amit Varma]: your other life like in the sense that what makes you happy like if you get up
[Amit Varma]: in the morning like at one level the answer I don't want but I know will be
[Amit Varma]: true is that what will make you happy is the thought of going out and doing some
[Amit Varma]: great journalism in whatever way that is but apart from that what are the things
[Amit Varma]: that kind of make you happy and that that you look at and perhaps what are
[Amit Varma]: the things that you've discovered make you happy that may not have made you
[Amit Varma]: happy 20 years ago you know and just in terms of how you've evolved through life
[Guest]: so this will come as a very shocking news but I do a range of things people
[Guest]: may wonder where do I get the time for all this but I like organizing parties
[Guest]: as I already told you even if there's no birthday I want to a theme party for the
[Guest]: kids in the apartment I'll do it every two or three months like during the
[Guest]: pandemic we have had Avengers party we have had Harry Potter we have everything
[Guest]: so I like to make all the decoration I mean I may be editing a story but with
[Guest]: that I will do the decoration I will do everything I love doing it I'm a great
[Guest]: pet lover so most of my time goes like morning make the so I have three pets at
[Guest]: home two temporary pets who keep coming and going and I feed five fat cats
[Guest]: below my apartment so morning we make the food we do one round and give it to
[Guest]: all the cats then evening I do one round give all the cats their food and each
[Guest]: person has a different diet like one cat likes a certain dry food another cat
[Guest]: likes so I make sure all the diet is ready then of course I have to do all
[Guest]: their vaccinations make sure I catch them neuter them in case I can't neuter
[Guest]: them I'll take care of their babies so a lot of time and money goes into
[Guest]: pet care absolutely no doubt about it and I read I read all kinds of things I
[Guest]: can read serious stuff from really bored I will read a Mills and Boones I will
[Guest]: read shitty romance stories because then I feel like that story's ended right
[Guest]: it's like a 200 page book I'm very happy with it I watch Urdu serials I binge on
[Guest]: Turkish serials so I do all kinds of things my only point is that if I'm
[Guest]: reading a book or I'm watching TV I have to know the ending so I can't start
[Guest]: watching something a series which is not ended I first look at the ending I'll
[Guest]: see who's dead what happens and then I will start from the beginning so I never
[Guest]: I'm not the kind of person who can watch what is it Game of Thrones I know watch
[Guest]: Game of Thrones while the series is going on after all the entire series
[Guest]: stopped I watched it because the tension of waiting for the next series is
[Guest]: something I cannot deal with so I do a lot of other things a lot of art stuff
[Guest]: I'm not artistic but I think I am therefore I keep doing all kinds of
[Guest]: stuff I keep myself very busy that way no offense but you're completely crazy I
[Amit Varma]: can't figure out if you're one person or some kind of collective like you know
[Amit Varma]: sometimes I'll ask my guests about counterfactuals what if you had lived
[Amit Varma]: this life what if you have lived that life you are actually living all these
[Amit Varma]: lives at the same time like feeding five cats twice a day five different things
[Amit Varma]: according to what cuisine they prefer is just nuts but I'm glad you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: books because my final question is about that and that's sort of the one that is
[Amit Varma]: the rigor for all guests who come on the show that recommend some books and not
[Amit Varma]: just books recommend books music films whatever that you've really liked me it
[Amit Varma]: could be something recent it could be a perennial favorite but it could be
[Amit Varma]: something that you're so happy about that you just want to shout to the world
[Amit Varma]: like read this book or watch this film or listen to this okay so I don't have a
[Guest]: single music app I don't listen to music okay that's fair enough
[Guest]: movie what is the movie I saw which I want people to watch okay let's say the
[Amit Varma]: world is ending in six hours and Vignesh says let's watch a movie together to you
[Amit Varma]: know bring it to an end what would you pick
[Guest]: okay fine okay that I'll tell now book book book you just said that I'll tell
[Amit Varma]: and you change the subject no I will I mean I'm thinking I'll record the answer
[Guest]: properly so I'm thinking what is the book actually one of the books I want to
[Guest]: suggest wait hold on so people will buy that book also yeah yeah yeah I mean
[Guest]: these will all be linked from the show notes yeah yeah hold on because I can't
[Guest]: remember the full title of that book yeah it's quite sad I don't listen to
[Amit Varma]: music not everybody does everything I mean I don't listen to new music as much
[Amit Varma]: as I would like to I just go back to old comfort music kind of things which I
[Amit Varma]: used to listen to her 30 years ago but books I I'm always reading so books I
[Guest]: mean I read all the books but I don't know what to suggest like I finished
[Guest]: Akar all this Westland publications context Rukmini's book is very nice yeah
[Guest]: she's the person I want to be like she speaks so calmly and yeah I tell her
[Guest]: that you are what I aspire to be like speak calmly I cannot speak calmly yeah
[Amit Varma]: but she can't do five cats and throw parties yeah so fine that's okay so I
[Guest]: don't think I should recommend music I'm one of those strange people who don't
[Guest]: have a music app on their phones I used to listen to music when I was a kid but
[Guest]: somehow I just I don't have that habit anymore so what I do is I listen to two
[Guest]: songs I put them on loop there is this one song I mean it's it's really
[Guest]: embarrassing to say this but there's one Malayalam song called Malare in one
[Guest]: movie called Prema so it sort of hypnotizes me so if I have to edit a
[Guest]: copy I'll put a headphone I'll put that song in loop and then I'll edit my copy
[Guest]: because I just want to drown out my noises so music I will not suggest I
[Guest]: have no clue about music about about books there is one book by NWMI which is
[Guest]: the group I belong to network of women in media it's called missing half the
[Guest]: story journalism as if gender matters it's got essays by Kalpana Sharma
[Guest]: Lakshmi Murthy Ammu Joseph Rajashree Das Gupta and all that I think for many
[Guest]: young journalists that would make a lot of difference to read that book there is
[Guest]: also Revati's books Rohini Mohan books now Rukmini so I really want to suggest
[Guest]: books written by other women journalists because those have shaped my thoughts
[Guest]: and I hope it will help others also fabulous and films I asked you right
[Guest]: hypothetical question I enjoy all kinds of movies but I want to tell people to
[Guest]: go back and watch some of the old Malayalam movies which are very funny
[Guest]: you may enjoy it but what is the one movie which I would want to watch if I'm
[Guest]: gonna die in six hours and I have to have to watch a movie I can only think
[Guest]: of really silly movies like Notting Hill which is why I'm just saying that I
[Guest]: don't want to think of some real see like I said for me a movie should not
[Guest]: bring any kind of tension I don't want movies in which there's like some
[Guest]: tensed plot and people are dying in the end I just want a happy movie no film
[Guest]: with a bookshop in it can be bad so Notting Hill is perfectly fine yeah maybe
[Amit Varma]: yes that is what one movie which people can watch great and I told you that's the
[Amit Varma]: last question but I lied one final thing which is that if listeners want to
[Amit Varma]: support the news minute what is the URL where should they go what should they do
[Guest]: so it's very easy go to the newsminute.com on top of it there's a button
[Guest]: called support us and there are two options one is you can make a one-time
[Guest]: payment which can be any amount of money that you want to give and you become
[Guest]: member or we have two types of membership one is thousand rupees per
[Guest]: year and another one is three thousand three hundred rupees per year but again
[Guest]: if it if you're choosing the second option you can give any amount you want
[Guest]: like we have people who give us 50,000 rupees or 1 lakh rupees it's not like a
[Guest]: lot of people but there are people who do give like that because like I said
[Guest]: they must have closed their eyes and thought do I want a world where the
[Guest]: news minute is not there and they decided no so they give many people
[Guest]: cannot afford to so it's fine if you cannot afford to pay you contribute to
[Guest]: the news organization different ways share their stories on your timelines on
[Guest]: your whatsapp groups everybody cannot pay right those who cannot pay support
[Guest]: in other ways but if it's an I mean I make it a point every day evening to at
[Guest]: least share one scroll story one via story whatever it is because I want them
[Guest]: also to go on I I want to make sure that they exist so just do your bit because
[Guest]: we cannot all just mourn democracy and say that oh my god democratic values are
[Guest]: being forgotten in this country institutions are being weakened etc
[Guest]: without doing our bit to it and if our bit is simply supporting people speaking
[Guest]: up then let's do that and that need not be only journalists that can be so many
[Guest]: other people right that can be the five girls who have gone to court saying that
[Guest]: I have my right to wear the hijab that can be somebody else who's fighting so
[Guest]: many strikes go on so everything whatever it is do your bit of
[Guest]: contributing if you want to contribute to the news minute please support us
[Amit Varma]: please support the news minute Dhania thank you so much for you know being so
[Amit Varma]: patient and coming on this show I really enjoyed talking to you I was very
[Guest]: nervous because I speak really fast and sometimes I say stuff which I regret
[Guest]: later so I was like should I come should I come but I think it went well thank
[Amit Varma]: you so much thank you
[Amit Varma]: if you enjoyed listening to this episode share it with whoever you feel might
[Amit Varma]: like it in fact any past episode of the show that you've liked and head on
[Amit Varma]: over to the news minute.com slash support us and help the news minute grow
[Amit Varma]: you can follow Dhania on Twitter at Dhania Rajendran you can follow me at
[Amit Varma]: Amit Verma AMI TV ARMA and you can browse past episodes of the seen and the
[Amit Varma]: unseen at seen unseen dot I n thank you for listening
[Amit Varma]: did you enjoy this episode of the scene in the unseen if so would you like to
[Amit Varma]: support the production of the show you can go over to seen unseen dot I n slash
[Amit Varma]: support and contribute any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and
[Amit Varma]: kicking thank you